འབད-པ	compare: {རྩོལ་བ}, exertion; {བརྩོན་འགྲུས}, effort
འབྲས-བུ	for synonyms and examples see: {བྱས་པ}
འབྲས-ཆན	get ex from Ship 62a SW added this record
འབྲས-སྤུངས	The two principle colleges are Go-mang (sgo mang) and Lo-sel-ling (blo gsal gling) ?(PH) Comment: "Rice Mound," said to be called this because its founder Jam-y#ang-chö-jay announced, "I will build a monastic university like a mound of rice and retreat hermitage above it for myself shaped like a mouse ready to eat the rice, the latter being called Mouse Hermitage." (PH) add meaning / note about locale of Kalacakra teachings .... DhAnyakaTaka = 'bras spungs?
འབྲས-བུ-ལྔ	see: {འབྲས་བུ}
འབྲས-བུའི-ཐེག-པ	this is another name for tantra, because a tantric practitioner takes the effect state, Buddhahood, as the basis of her or his practice (T)
འབྲེ-པ	Thumi, p. 180, has: bre / 'bre / bres / 'bres
འབྲེལ	see: {འབྲེལ་པ}
འབྲེལ-བ-བརྟག-པའི-རབ-ཏུ-བྱེད-པ	one of the Seven Treatises on Prime Cognition
འབྲེལ-བ-མེད-པའི-དོན	(PH) added meanings "unrelated; meaningless" based on example
འབྲེས	See " 'bre pa "
འབུལ	Thumi, p.160, has: dbul / 'bul / phul / 'buld (T)
འབྱོར-བ	JH: ck ex 1 eng (SW)
འབྱུང-གྱུར	see: {འབྱུང་འགྱུར་གྱི་རེག་བྱ}
འབྱུང-འགྱུར-གྱི-རེག-བྱ	one of the two divisions of tangible object (reg bya, spraSTavya); the other is: tangible object which is an element ('byung bar gyur pa'i reg bya)
འབྱུང-བ-ཆེན-པོ-བཞི-པོ-དག	see: {འབྱུང་བར་གྱུར་པའི་རེག་བྱ}
འབྱུང-བར-གྱུར-པའི-རེག-བྱ	one of the two divisions of tangible object (reg bya, spraSTavya); the other is: tangible object that is arisen from elements ('byung 'gyur gyi reg bya)
འཆའ	get examples: phyag rgya bca'; rkang pa sems dpa'i skyil krung du bca'; khrims su bcas pa. Same as added to "bca' ba" and "bcas pa".
འཆབ-པ	concealment; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
འཆར	Check tenses (T)
འཆིང-བ	Check tenses, none match entry? (T)
འདའ	Check tenses-incomplete? (T)
འདས	Check tenses-incomplete? (T)
འདས-སྨྲ-བ	a Lesser Vehicle sub-school ??? (T)
འདོད-ཆགས	rAga; Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi).
འདོད-ཁམས	one of the three realms in Buddhist cosmology; the others are: form realm (gzugs khams, rUpa-dhAtu); and formless realm (gzugs med khams, arUpya-dhAtu)
འདོད-སེམས	i.e., a mind of a being in the desire realm ('dod khams)
འདོད-པའི-ཁམས	one of the three realms in Buddhist cosmology; the others are: the form realm (gzugs khams, rUpa-dhAtu) and the formless realm (gzugs med khams, arUpya-dhAtu)
འདོད-ཆགས-མེད-པ	Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
འདོད-ཆགས-དང-བྲལ-བའི-ས	one of the eight grounds of the Lesser Vehicle ?? (T)
འདྲེས-མ	get ex from Ship 74a.7 SW added this entry
འདྲིལ-པ	see: {དྲིལ}
འདུ-ཤེས	one of the five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga, paJca-sarvatraga); for others see: {ཀུན་འགྲོ}
འདུ-བྱེད-ཀྱི-ལས	the second of the twelve links of dependent-arising
འདུག-སྟངས	add "gz" as abbreviaton for Ship at beginningSW added this entry; needs Tib sort code
འདུལ-བ	one of the five main divisions of study in Tibetan Ge-luk-ba monasteries; the others are: valid cognition (tshad ma, pramANa); perfection of wisdom (phar phyin, prajJA-pAramitA); the middle way school (dbu ma, mAdhyamaka); and the Compendium of Knowledge (chos mngon mdzod, abhidharma-koza)
འདུལ-བའི-དབང-གིས	through the force of taming; Comment: Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso reports that D#ra-d#i Ge-s#hay Rin-chen-dön-drup (pra sti dge bshes rin chen don grub) interprets "through the force of taming" as "through the force of taming trainees having the lineage of the Middle Way School by means of the literal reading" (gdul bya dbu ma pa'i rigs can sgras zin des 'dul ba'i dbang gis). However, Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso points out that D#zong-ka-b#a himself in the section on the Consequence School of the Essence of Eloquence glosses "through the force of taming" with "through the force of trainees' thought" (gdul bya'i bsam pa'i dbang gis). It seems to me that both interpretations are suitable.
འདུན	see: {འདུན་པ}
འདུན-པ	one of the five determining factors (yul nges lnga, paJca-viSaya-pratiniyama); for others see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
འདུས-བྱས	refers to a phenomenon which is produced in dependence upon an aggregation of causes
འདུས-པ	compare: tshog pa (collection) and bsags pa (composite)
འདུས-བྱས-ཐམས-ཅད-མི-རྟག-པ	one of the four seals (that determine whether a doctrine is Buddhist, the phyag rgya bzhi); for others see: {ཕྱག་རྒྱ}
འདུས-མ-བྱས	Comment: See 'dus ma byas kyi chos.
འཛག-པ	Tenses from Thumi, p.224 (T)
འཛམ-བུ-གླིང	'dzam bu gling; Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
འཛིན	another example is d;$r-zjZh]-s#n-p-[[-f*[! (bzung 'dzin rdzas tha dad med/) "subject and object do not exist as different substantial entities" (T)
འཛིན-རྣམ	definition of self-knower (rang rig)
འཛོམ	get ex. from Ship; Tshig SW added this record
འཛོམས-པ	get ex. from Ship; Tshig SW added this record
འཛུམ-དམུལ-སྣུལ	Check entry: snul (T)
འགལ-མེད-མྱུར-དུ-བསྐོར-བ-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-འགལ-མེད-འཁོར-ལོར-སྣང-བའི-དབང-ཤེས	Comment: This is an illustration of non-conceptual counterfeit direct preception which is a sense consciousness and whose cause of error exists in the object (dbang shes su gyur pa'i 'khrul rgyu yul la yod pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
འགལ-ཁྱབ-རྣལ-མ	Comment: One of the four types of normative Check Kathy pervasion (khyab pa rnal ma bzhi); an illustration of this type of reasoning is: Whatever is a definiendum is necessarily not permanent (mtshon bya yin na / rtag pa ma yin pas khyab pa).Check Kathy
འགལ-ཁྱབ-ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག	Comment: One of the four types of perverse pervasions (khyab pa phyin ci log bzhi); an illustration of this type of reasoning is: whatever is a definiendum is necessarily not not-permanent (mtshon bya yin na / rtag pa ma yin pa ma yin pas khyab pa).Check Kathy
འགོ	Comment: See mgo.
འགོ-བ	Comment: See mgo.
འགྲེལ-བཤད	Comment: For instance, JayAnanda's Explanatory Commentary on CandrakIrti's autocommentary to his Supplement to (NAgArjuna's) "Treatise on the Middle."
འགྲེལ-རྐང	Comment: As in the "one hundred and eight" bases of exposition in the Perfection of Wisdom SUtras.
འགྲེལ-པ-བུདདྷ-པཱ-ལི-ཏ	Comment: The author's name has come to be included in the title.
འགྲེལ-པ-དོན-གསལ	Comment: A commentary on Maitreya's AbhisamayAlaMkAra (Ornament for Clear Realization), which is a commentary on the ASTasAhasrikAprajJApAramitAsUtra (Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom SUtra).
འགྲོ-བ-མེད-དོ	check synonym (T); (PH) There is no corrsponding entry for (rnam par grol ba med do) ?without - liberation?\nJH: I'm lost; we are no longer doing syn. What is PH saying??
འགྲོང	check tenses
འགྲོས-གསུམ-པར-སྐྱེ-བ	production in three types; Comment: This is one of the three assertions concerning mental direct perceptions indicated on this occasion (skabs 'dir bstan gyi yid mngon): production only at the end of a continuum (rgyun mtha' kho nar skye ba); alternating production (spel mar skye ba); and production in three types ('gros gsum par skye ba).
འགྲུབ	See: grub, grub pa.
འི	Comment: One of five genitive particles—gi, kyi, gyi, 'i, yi.
འིས	instrumental; Comment: One of five instrumental particles—gis, kyis, gyis, 'is, yis.
འཇམ-མགོན	Comment: According to S#er-s#hül L#o-sang-pün-tsok, "smooth" ('jam, maJju) indicates that MaJjushrI is devoid of the roughness of the obstructions to liberation from cyclic existence and the roughness of the obstructions to omniscience. This is not the Bodhisattva MaJjushrI but the one that is the physical manifestation of the wisdom of all Buddhas.
འཇིག	Check Tenses (T)
འཇིག-པ	Comment: definition of compounded phenomenon ('dus byas)\nCheck tenses (T)
འཇིག-ཚོགས	See: {འཇིག་ལྟ}
འཇིག-ཚོགས-ལ-ལྟ-བའི-བག-ཆགས	Comment: In Mind-Only, these are predispositions causing generation of the afflicted intellect(nyon yid, kliSTamanas) viewing the mind-basis-of-all (kun shes rnam shes, Alayavijnana) and thinking, "I."
འཇིག-མེད-གནས	variant for 'jigs med gnas, or 'jigs med ri la gnas pa
འཇིག-རྟེན-ལ-གྲགས-པ	division of rags pa, also see: {བསྟན་བཅོས་ལ་གྲགས་པ}
འཇིག-རྟེན-ལས-འདས-པའི-སེམས-ཙམ	Comment: A syncretic system propounded by Dol-b#o-b#a S#hay-rap-gyel-tsen. Synonyms include Ultimate Mind-Only (don dam pa'i sems tsam), Final Mind-Only (mthar thug gi sems tsam), and Great Middle Way (dbu ma chen po).
འཇིགས-པ-ལྔ	These are: (1) fear of giving away all one has and becoming destitute; (2) fear of sacrificing one's reputation; (3) fear of sacrificing oneself because one is afraid of death; (4) fear of falling into evil; (5) fear of addressing an assembly, especially of men of high position\nShould these be put into divisions?? (T)
འཇིགས-པ-ལྔ-ལས-ཡང-དག-པར-འདས-པ	See previous entry
འཇོག-བྱེད-གཞན-ལ-མ-ལྟོས-པ	one of the three types of natural pervasion (rang bzhin khyab pa); for others see: rang bzhin khyab pa. Comment: This is one of the three attributes of inherent nature (rang bzhin khyad par gsum): (1) its entity is not produced by causes and conditions (ngo bo rgyu rkyen gyis ma bskyed pa); (2) it does not rely upon another means of positing it ('jog byed gzhan la ma ltos pa); (3) its state does not change into something else (gnas skabs gzhan du mi 'gyur ba).
འཇོམས	SW added "overcome" to Eng. definitions
འཇོམས-པ	SW added "overcome" to Eng. definitions
འཇུག	Other examples: snyoms par 'jug lang byed nus pa dang -- one is able to enter into and arise from ...(TGP 86); dkyil 'khor du bcug nas -- having ushered him into the maNDala,(Ship 62a.2); de'i shugs dang ldan par 'jug pa mi 'gal -- it is not contradictory that it operates within possessing the force of that(TGP 8); ldang 'jug gnas gsum kyi gdangs -- the tone of the three: exhalation, inhalation, and retention
འཇུག-སེམས	Compare: {སྨོན་སེམས}, aspirational mind of enlightenment
འཁོན	Comment: See next entry.
འཁོན-འཛིན	upanAha; resentment; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) upanAha ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
འཁོར-གསུམ	Comment: A logical term used when the opponent has been boxed in. The three are to have asserted either explicitly or implicitly (1) the entailment/pervasion (khyab pa khas blangs pa red), (2) the reason (rtags khas blangs pa red), and (3) the opposite of the predicate of the consequence (gsal ba'i zlogs phyogs khas blangs pa red). Spoken or shouted in debate by the challenger to indicate that the opponent cannot deny the reason or the pervasion, yet cannot accept the "thesis" of the consequence.
འཁོར-སྒྱུར	universal monarch; Comment: A universal monarch rules by way of a wheel.
འཁོར-ལོས-སྒྱུར-བ	universal monarch; Comment: A universal monarch rules by way of a wheel.
འཁོར-ལོ-སྒྱུར-བ	universal monarch; Comment: A universal monarch rules by way of a wheel.
འཁོར-བའི-མངོན-མཐོ	Comment: The term mngon mtho (abhyudaya) refers to elevated (ud) states, i.e., the happinesses, of humans and gods relative to animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings within the five types of lives in cyclic existence.
འཁྲུལ-བ-རྟོག-པ	Comment: An instance of this is a conceptual consciousness apprehending sound as permanent (sgra rtag 'dzin rtog pa). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
འཁྲུལ-རྒྱུ-རྟེན-ལ-ཡོད-པ	Comment: An instance of this is a sense consciousness to which, in dependence upon the eyes [which are the basis of an eye consciousness] being affected by opthamalia, one moon appears as two (mig rab rib kyis bslad pa la brten nas zla gcig zla gnyis su snang ba'i dbang shes). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang). Among these, this is one of the four non-conceptual facsimiles check Kathy: bogus/fake? of direct perception which are sense consciousnesses (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
འཁྲུལ-རྒྱུ-གནས-ལ-ཡོད-པ	Comment: An instance of this is an eye consciousness which, in dependence upon one's abiding in a boat, sees trees as moving (grur zhugs pa la brten nas ljon shing 'gro bar snang ba'i dbang shes). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang). Among these, this is one of the four non-conceptual facsimiles check Kathy: bogus/fake? of direct perception which are sense consciousnesses (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
འཁྲུལ-རྒྱུ-དེ-མ-ཐག-རྐྱེན-ལ-ཡོད-པ	Comment: An instance of this is a sense consciousness to which the area appears as red in dependence upon the mind's being disturbed by anger (yid zhe sdang gis dkrugs pa la brten nas sa gzhi dmar por snang ba'i dbang shes). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang). Among these, this is one of the four non-conceptual facsimiles check Kathy: bogus/fake? of direct perception which are sense consciousnesses (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
འཁྲུལ-རྒྱུ-ཡུལ-ལ-ཡོད-པ	Comment: An instance of this is a consciousness to which a firebrand wheel appears in dependence upon quickly turning a fire brand ('gal med myur du skor ba la brten nas 'gal med 'khor lor snang ba'i dbang shes). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang). Among these, this is one of the four non-conceptual facsimiles check Kathy: bogus/fake? of direct perception which are sense consciousnesses (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
འོ-བརྒྱལ	SW added this record
འོད-བྱེད	third of the ten Bodhisattva Superior grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
འོད-གསལ	Comment: This is the fifth of the six stages of the completion stage in the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tanta: physical isolation (lus dben), verbal isolation (ngag dben), mental isolation (sems dben), illusory body (sgyus lus), clear light ('od gsal), union (zung 'jug).
འོད-འཕྲོ-བ	fourth of the ten Bodhisattva Superior grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
འོད-འཕྲོ-ཅན	fourth of the ten Bodhisattva Superior grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
འོད-འཕྲོ-བ-ཅན	fourth of the ten Bodhisattva Superior grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
འོད-བྱེད-པ	third of the ten Bodhisattva Superior grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
འོལ-པ	Comment: a big black bird that sweeps down on rabbits or small sheep and carries them away
འཕགས-པ	Comment: someone who has cognized emptiness directly and thus has risen above the state of a common being.
འཕགས-པའི-ལམ-ཡང-ལག-བརྒྱད-པ	These are: correct views, realization, speech, aims of actions, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and meditative stabilization; they are attained with the path of meditation
འཕགས-པ-ལྷ	p.n. of the great MAdyamaka philosopher
འཕར-བ	Comment: a little bigger than a dog, has very bright fur, and moves in packs with the animals jumping back and forth over each other
འཕེན-བྱེད-ཀྱི-ལས	one of the two types of fruitional cause (rnam smin kyi rgyu); the other is completing karma (rdzogs byed kyi las)
འཕོ	Should "emission" (ex.4) be included in English? (T)
འཕོ-བར-སྨྲ-བ	one of the eighteen sub-schools of the VaibhAShikas; according to BhAvaviveka it is one of the seven SarvAstivadin schools; see Meditation on Emptiness, pp.339-340 (T)
འཕྲད	See: phrad\nEnglish for ex 2 ? Thumi, p.166, has phrad as an alternate for the future (T)
འཕྲལ	Thumi, p.166, has the above tenses listed as meaning: "to part; to separate; to keep or put apart" (T)
འཕྲོ	Check tenses. Thumi, p.168, has: 'phro / 'phro ('phros) / phro / phros (T)
འཕྲོ-བ	English and Others' entries were separated by a period by the latter had no source identification? See previous record about tenses (T)
འཕྲོད	Thumi, p.168, has: 'phrod / 'phrod / phrod / phrod as meaning "to receive; to be recognized; to be fit or suitable ..." (T)
འཕྲོས	See record 642, re: tenses (T) SW added Engl. "elaborate"; should the Tib Ex. be "rab phye" for "rab byed"?
འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	bases of magical emanations; These are: (1) aspiration to the bases of magical emanations (chanda-Rddhi-pAda); (2) effort toward the bases of magical emanations (vIrya-Rddhi-pAda); (3) mental attention on the bases of magical emanations (citta-Rddhi-pAda, involving fixing one's mind in the position reached); and (4) analysis of the bases of magical emanations (mImaMsA-Rddhi-pAda); they are attained on the great path of accumulation
འཕྱ-བར-བྱེད	English is from Thumi, p.162 (T)
འཕྱག	to sweep; Thumi, p.162, has: phyag / 'phyag / phyags / 'phyags for the tenses of "to sweep" (T)
འཕྱགས	See previous entry's comment
འཕྱར	Thumi, p.162, has: phyar / 'phyar / phyard / phyord for the tenses of "to lift up, raise, hoist" (T)
འཕྱོགས	See record 622 (T)
འཐད-ལྡན	Where should the synonym/secondary title go??? (T)
འཐོབ	Thumi (p.122) lists 'thob as the present of thob ?? (T)
འཐུང	Tense originally had: btung / 'thung / bdungs / thungs ,changed to match Thumi p.110 (T)
འཚབ	SW added this record
འཚལ	see: {འཚོལ}
འཚམས	get Eng; "case; instance" is WRONG!
འཚང-རྒྱ-བ	compare: {སངས་རྒྱས་པ}, become Buddhified
འཚིག-པ	spite; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
འཚོད	get ex. from rDor 'grel (Ship?)
ཊཱི-ཀཱ	SW changed entry to TI kA from ti ka.
ཊི-ཀ	Check Tib entry (my interpretation) versus Wylie. (T)
ཊི-ཀཀ	Check spelling of Tibetan entry. (T)
ཨ-ལྦ	Check Tib. entry. I added second spelling (T)
ཨ-ནུ	see previous comment
ཨ-ཏི	atiyoga is the highest of the three divisions of Highest Yoga Tantra in N#ying-ma: mahAyoga, anuyoga, and atiyoga
ཨ-ཝ	Check Tib. entry. I added second spelling (T)
བྷ-ག	add ex. from Ship
བ-གླང	Need English for definition (T)
བ-ལང	See: {བ་གླང}
བ-ཉིད	cow-ness; Check entry—should it be "rnon ba"? (T)SW added Eng "cow-ness"
བ-སྤུ	body hair; ck sp. get ex. Is it only body hair?
བ-གླང-གནས-པ	one of the eighteen VaibhAShika sub-schools, a branch of the MahAsaMghikas; see Meditation on Emptiness, p.40 (T)
བ-ལང-སྤྱོད	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
བད-ཀན	phlegm; Comment: This is one of the three problematics (nyes pa; doza), often mistranslated as "humours," but the "humours" are fluids as in the four elemental fluids of the body--blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. In Buddhist medicine the three problematics, which, when in balance, promote health and, when imbalanced, promote disease, are wind (rlung), bile (mkhris pa), and phlegm (pad kan).
བག-མེད	see: {བག་མེད་པ}
བག-ཡོད	See: {བག་ཡོད་པ}
བག-ཡོད-པ	Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
བག-མེད-པ	Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
བག-ཆགས-བརྟན-བྱུང	Comment: Saying "stable predispositions" distinguishes between consciousnesses polluted by a superficial cause of error and those which are not. Predispositions giving rise to direct perceptions are stable in the sense that their continuum will continue as long as does cyclic existence; those that give rise to wrong consciousnesses such as a sense consciousness seeing blue snow mountains or a conceptual consciousness apprehending sound as permanent are unstable in that their continuum can be adventitiously cut off.
བཻ-དུའ-རྱ	transliteration of Sanskrit word—vaidhurya\nNeed to fix Tibetan; Monier-Williams agrees with Conze—vaiDUrya (p.1021)
བཻ-དུའ-རྱ-འདུག-པ-ཡིན	Fix Tibetan
བམ-པོ	get ex from Ship SW added this entry
བང-ཆེན	SW added this record. Check Eng. "emissary", "ambassador" which we did not consider when we read this in Buddhaguhya's Letter of Advice
བཅའ	get examples: phyag rgya bca'; rkang pa sems dpa'i skyil krung du bca'; khrims su bcas pa. Also add to "bcas pa" and "'cha' ba".
བཅད-པ	See: {གཅོད་པ}
བཅད-ཤེས	one of the types of knowledge and awareness (blo rig) according to the sevenfold division; for others see: {བློ་རིག}
བཅངས	Tenses ?? (T)
བཅས	and; get examples: phyag rgya bca'; rkang pa sems dpa'i skyil krung du bca'; khrims su bcas pa: same as added to "bca' ba" and "'cha' ba"
བཅོམ-ལྡན	Comment: See bcom ldan 'das.
བཅོམ-ལྡན-འདས	Comment: This term is translated in accordance with the etymology favored in Tibet, where it is recognized that bhagavan also can be etymologized as "one who possesses the six goodnesses" (legs pa drug dang ldan pa), which seems to fit the more widely used translation as "Blessed One."
བདག	Comment: it is said that in general "self," "person," (gang zag, pudgala) and "I" (nga, ahaM) are equivalent, in the particular context of the selflessness of persons "self" and "person" are not at all equivalent and do not at all have the same meaning. In the term "selflessness of persons," "self" refers to a falsely imagined status that needs to be refuted, whereas "persons" refers to existent beings who are the bases with respect to which that refutation is made. All four Buddhist schools, therefore, hold that persons exist; they do not claim that persons are mere fictions of ignorance.
བདག-པོ	get ex from rDor 'grel
བདག-རྐྱེན	one of the four types of conditions (rkyen); for others see: {རྐྱེན}
བདག-སྒྲ	Comment: a grammatical term. (PH) I added this comment; you might want to clarify the usage of the term better.
བདག-ཏུ-འཛིན-པ	See: {བདག་འཛིན}
བདག-ལ-དགོངས-སུ-གསོལ	fix tab space in Tib ex 1
བདག-གཅིག-འབྲེལ	Check definition (2nd half) is it 'grel or 'brel?? (T)
བདག-གཅིག-ཏུ-འབྲེལ	See next entry
བདག-པའི-རྐྱེན	See: {བདག་རྐྱེན}
བདག-པའི-འབྲས-བུ	one of the five types of effect ('bras bu); for others see: {འབྲས་བུ}
བདག-ལྟའི-བག-ཆགས	predispositions of the view of self; Comment: There are four types of predispositions in Ge-luk-b#a explanations of Mind-Only (sems tsam): predispositions of [perceptions of] similar type (rigs mthun gyi bag chags); predispositions of verbalization (mngon brjod kyi bag chags, abhilApavAsanA); predispositions of the view of self (bdag lta'i bag chags, AtmadRStivAsanA); predispositions of the branches of cyclic existence (srid pa'i yan lag gi bag chags, bhavAGgavAsanA.
བདག-ཉིད-ཆེ	get pg # for ex from A's Rite
བདག-ཉིད-ཆེན-པོ	get pg # for ex from A's Rite
བདག-ཉིད-ང-རྒྱལ	pride of selfhood; Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
བདག-པོའི-འབྲས-བུ	one of the five types of effect ('bras bu, phala); for others see: {འབྲས་བུ}
བདག-པོ-རྐྱེན	See: {བདག་རྐྱེན}
བདེ-འབྱུང	Bliss-Arising; Comment: also known as mahezvara or ziva. Gung-tang reports that Maheshvara (Great Lord) is called "Bliss-Arising" not because he himself becomes blissful in dependence upon the goddess Uma but because his body is so supremely satisfying that when others see it, all virtues, including liberation, as well as temporary happiness arise. This is why Maheshvara is called a source of joy.
བདེན-པར-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight types of object of negation (dgag bya) in the PrAsaGgika system (and one of five in SvAtantrika); for others see: {དགག་བྱ}
བདེན-བཞིའི-ཆོས-འཁོར	an example of valid speech (ngag tshad ma)
བདེན-པ-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of path of seeing (mthong lam)
བདུད-སྡིག-ཅན	Comment: an epithet of the God of Desire ('dod lha, kAmadeva).
བདུད-ཡི-དམ	Comment: a pejorative expression, dismissive of a "tutelary deity" (yi dam). (PH) added comment
བདུན	SW changed ex 1 Eng to "Valid Cognition" from "Prime Cognition"; (PH) make sure #s 1-10 in dictionary?; add "sde bdun" as separate entry?
བེམ-ཤེས-ལྡན-མིན-འདུ-བྱེད-གསུམ	Comment: These are the the three divisions of thing (dngos po).
བེམ-ཤེས-གང-རུང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-དངོས-པོ	Comment: This is one of three definitions of non-associated compositional factor (ldan min 'du byed, viprayukta-saMskAra): (1) a thing that is neither matter nor consciousness (bem shes gang rung ma yin pa'i dngos po); (2) a thing that is neither form nor consciousness (gzugs shes gang rung ma yin pa'i dngos po); (3) a compounded phenomenon that is neither matter nor consciousness (gzugs shes gang rung ma yin pa'i 'dus byas).
བེམ-ཤེས-གང-རུང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-འདུས-བྱས	Comment: This is one of three definitions of non-associated compositional factor (ldan min 'du byed, viprayukta-saMskAra): (1) a thing that is neither matter nor consciousness (bem shes gang rung ma yin pa'i dngos po); (2) a thing that is neither form nor consciousness (gzugs shes gang rung ma yin pa'i dngos po); (3) a compounded phenomenon that is neither matter nor consciousness (gzugs shes gang rung ma yin pa'i 'dus byas).
བགོ-གཞི	See bsgo ba'i gzhi
བི-ཤོ-དྷ-ན	vizodhana; ck sp of Sanskrit Comment: transliteration of Sanskrit word—vizodhana
བི-ཤི-ཁཱ	transliteration of Sanskrit word—vizikhA
བཀའ-གདམས-གདམས-ངག-པ	Preceptual G#a-dam; Comment: This is one of the two branches of the G#a-dam School: Textual G#a-dam (bka' gdams gzhung pa ba) and Preceptual G#a-dam (bka' gdams gdams ngag pa). The Ge-luk-b#a school is sometimes traced to the Textual G#a-dam.
བཀའ-གདམས-གཞུང-པ-བ	Textual G#a-dam; Comment: This is one of the two branches of the G#a-dam School: Textual G#a-dam (bka' gdams gzhung pa ba) and Preceptual G#a-dam (bka' gdams gdams ngag pa). The Ge-luk-b#a school is sometimes traced to the Textual G#a-dam.
བླ-མ-པ	The eighteenth VaibhAShika School in BhAvaviveka's first rendition set forth in his Blaze of Reasoning, equivalent to the SaMkrAntivAdins in other renderings; see Meditation on Emptiness, p.714 (T)
བླང	Thumi, p.180, has "lend" for the imperative (T)
བླང-བ	See comment of "blang" (T)
བླངས	See comment of "blang" (T)
བློ-གཏེར	epithet of MaJjughoSa (=MaJjuzrI), the Buddha of wisdom
བློ-བཟང-དོན-སྒྲུབ	or is it don grub?
བློ-རིག-གི-མཐའ-དཔྱོད	In English: blo bsang rta dbyangs = blo bsang rta mgrin ?? (T)
བློ-རིག-བདུན-དུ-དབྱེ-བ	see: {བློ་རིག}
བློའི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the two types of other-eliminators that are affirming negatives (ma yin dgag gi gzhan sel); the other is don rang mtshan gyi gzhan sel
བློའི-ཡུལ-དུ-བྱ-རུང-བ	definition of object of knowledge (shes bya)
བློས-རིག-པར-བྱ-བ	definition of object (yul, viSaya)
བོ	SW added this record
བོ-དོང-ཕོཡགས-ལས-རྣམ-རྒྱལ	ck spelling; get dates
བོབས	No listing of this in Thumi (T)
བོད-སྐད	I turned John's note into divisions. Is that OK? (T)
བོར	Tenses and English are from Thumi, p.174-5 (T)
བྲལ-བའི-འབྲས-བུ	one of the five types of effects; for others see: {འབྲས་བུ}
བྲམ-ཟེ	a member of the highest of the four traditional castes (varNas) in Hinduism
བརྡ	compare: {ཐ་སྙད}, designation, convention; and: sgra, sound, term
བརྡ-ལ-བྱང-བའི-སྐྱེས-བུ	Comment: This refers to someone who knows language, as opposed to the very young, and so forth.
བརྡར	Thumi (p.134) gives the meaning: to sharpen or to rub (T)
བརྡེག-འཆའ	Check tenses (T)
བརྫང	SW added this record
བརྫངས	SW added this record
བརྫི-བ	see the entry for rdzi (T)
བྲེ-པ	Thumi, p.180, has: bre / 'bre / bres / 'bres (T)
བྲེས-པ	See comment of "bre pa" (T)
བརྒྱུད-འབྲས	indirect effect; Comment: There are two types of effects: direct effect (dngos 'bras) and indirect effect (brgyud 'bras).
བརྒྱུད-རྒྱུ	indirect cause; Comment: There are two types of causes, direct cause (dngos rgyu) and indirect cause (brgyud rgyu).
བརྒྱུད-ནས-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of indirect cause (brgyud rgyu).
བརྗེ	SW added "coarse " to Engl. definition
བརྗེད-ངེས-པ	forgetfulness; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
བརྗོད-བྱེད-ཀྱི-སྒྲ	??? compare with: rjod byed kyi sgra ??? (PH)
བརྗོད-པའི-ཀུན-རྫོབ	Comment: This is one of three divisions of conventionalities: (1) imputational conventionalities (btags pa'i kun rdzob); (2) mental conventionalities (shes pa'i kun rdzob); (3) verbal conventionalities (brjod pa'i kun rdzob). Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso also identifies "imputational conventionalities" as imputational natures that are imputed by conceptuality to be truly existent whereas they are not truly existent; "mental conventionalities" as other-powered natures, which are illustrated by "unreal ideation" (yang dag pa ma yin pa'i kun rtog) since it is the principal other-powered nature, and thus come to be called "mental"; "verbal conventionalities" as thoroughly established natures which, although they ultimately cannot be taken as objects by way of terms and conceptual consciousnesses, are suitable to be expressed through many verbal forms such as thusness and so forth.
བརླག	I entered this record from Thumi, p.242 (T)
བརླགས	I entered this record from Thumi, p.242 (T)
བརྙན	See: {གཟུགས་བརྙན}
བརྟག-པ	Comment: see: {རྟོག}
བརྟན	SW added verb & ex
བརྟན-པ	SW added Eng. "verb: have faith in; believe in; trust" and ex 2
བརྩམས	see: rtsom Comment: Gung-tang explains that brtsams here means "taking such and such as substrata" (khyad gzhir bzung ba), although in other places it means that "the thought comes down to such and such" (dgongs pa der 'bab pa tsam).
བརྩོན-འགྲུས	vIrya; effort; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) vIrya (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཕ-རོལ-ཕྱིན	one of the ten perfections; for others see: {ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ}
བསབ	SW added this record
བསབས	SW added this record
བསམ-གཏན-བཞི	see: {བསམ་གཏན}
བསམ-གཏན-ས	(PH) div. too long
བསམ-གཏན-བཞི-པ	see: {བསམ་གཏན}
བསམ-གཏན-ཕྱི-མ	one of the four central Action Tantras
བསྡད	See under sdod in 'tenses' (T)
བསྡུ	Check tense (T)
བསྡུ-བ	See previous re: Tense (T)
བསེ-རུ-ལྟ-བུའི-རང-རྒྱལ	see previous entry
བསེ-རུ-ལྟ-བུའི-རྟོགས-པ-སྔོན-དུ-སོང-བའི-རང-རྒྱལ-གྱི-མི-སློབ-ལམ	one of the two types of Solitary Realizer paths of no more learning the other being Solitary Realizer path of no more learning of those who previously had the realizations of congregating [Solitary Realizers] (tshogs spyod kyi rtogs pa sngon du song ba'i rang rgyal gyi mi slob lam)
བསྒོམ-པའི-ལམ	Comment: See sgom lam
བསྒྲུབ	See: {སྒྲུབ}
བཤད	(PH) too many sanskrit entries
བཤད-པ	see: {འཆད་པ}
བཤད-སྦྱར	this is a style of commentary
བཤད-པའི-རྒྱུད	Comment: The second of the Four [Medical] Tantras (rgyud bzhi) deals with formation of the human body (embryology), anatomy, signs of death, how conditions cause the manifestation of disorders, the characteristics of particular disorders, the functions of wind, bile, and phlegm when these operate properly and how they bring about diseases when imbalanced, and the corresponding medicines required to correct particular disorders. This second tantra also prescribes the diet and behavior patterns for maintaining health and for combatting disorders--for instance, the types of food one should refrain from, the quality and quantity of food that one should take, and different types of behavior--seasonal behavior, daily behavior, and temporary behavior.
བཤགས-པ	see: {འཆགས་པ}
བཤམ	Thumi p.248 has gshoms for the imperative (T)
བཤམ-པ	See comment of previous record (T)
བཤམས	see: {གཤོམ་པ}
བཤིག	see: {འཇིག་པ}
བསྐྲད	get tenses
བསྐྱེད-བྱ	Comment: That which is produced is the definition of effect ('bras bu).
བསྐྱུད-པ	Comment: D#zong-ka-b#a (DK 5.9) glosses mi bskyud pa (asaMpramoSatA [Lamotte, 67, n. 26]) with mi brjed pa (non-forgetfulness).
བསྙད-པ	Perhaps "slogan" instead of talk in first example? (T)
བསྙེམས-པ	SW added this entry.
བསྙེན	Thumi (p.104) lists English as: to cause to be closer or near; to bring nearer. (T)
བསྙེན-བཀུར-བྱེད	Do you want the French? (T)
བསྙོན-བཙུགས	Check Entry. I changed Tibetan to match Wylie, but I wonder ... if it was the reverse da for gs ?(T)
བསོད-ནམས-ཀྱི-ཚོགས	one of the two main collections of the Bodhisattva; the other is the collection of wisdom (ye shes kyi tshogs)
བསོད-ནམས-རྒྱ-ཆེན-པོ-འཕེལ	Tibetan entry is from (MSA)
བསོག	SW: is this a misspelling of "gsog"?
བསོགས	SW: is this a misspelling of "gsog"?
བསྲབས	past of srab
བསྲབས-པ	past of srab
བསྲབས-པའི-ས	fourth of the eight Hearer level's (T)
བསྲང	SW added this entry
བསྲངས	SW added this entry
བསྟན-བཅོས-ལ-གྲགས-པ	division of rags pa, also see: {འཇིག་རྟེན་ལ་གྲགས་པ}
བཏགས-ཡོད-ཆོས-གསུམ-ཚང-བ	definition of definition (mtshan nyid)
བཏགས-པའི-ཀུན-རྫོབ	Comment: This is one of three divisions of conventionalities: (1) imputational conventionalities (btags pa'i kun rdzob); (2) mental conventionalities (shes pa'i kun rdzob); (3) verbal conventionalities (brjod pa'i kun rdzob). Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso also identifies "imputational conventionalities" as imputational natures that are imputed by conceptuality to be truly existent whereas they are not truly existent; "mental conventionalities" as other-powered natures, which are illustrated by "unreal ideation" (yang dag pa ma yin pa'i kun rtog) since it is the principal other-powered nature, and thus come to be called "mental"; "verbal conventionalities" as thoroughly established natures which, although they ultimately cannot be taken as objects by way of terms and conceptual consciousnesses, are suitable to be expressed through many verbal forms such as thusness and so forth.
བཏང-སྙོམས	upekSA; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
བཏོན	Hackett wants to add Eng. "exclude"
བཙལ	future (& past?) of 'tshal to prostrate: add tenses, if different from "to search". get ex. from rDor 'grel commentary on A's homage
བཙལ-བ	past? of 'tshal to prostrate?
བཙོ	get ex. from rDor 'grel (Ship?)
བཙོས	get ex. from rDor 'grel (Ship?)
བཙོས-པ	get ex. from rDor 'grel (Ship?)
བཙུན-པ	SW added this record
བཙུན-མོ-རོལ-པ	one of the twelve deeds of a Buddha (T)
བཙུན-པ-གྲོལ-སྡེ	Comment: He is said to be the student of Vasubandhu's student and from Magadha; he is not to be confused with the earlier A#ryavimuktasena (rnam grol sde) who was Vasubandhu's disciple.
བུམ-དབང	one of the three/four types of initiation in Highest Yoga Tantra (?); the others being: substance initiation (rdzas dbang), secret initiation (gsang dbang), and word initiation (tshig dbang) \nPlease check (T)
བུམ-པ-ཚད-མས-མ-དམིགས-པ	(PH) English sounds a little weird. Shouldn't that be "pot unobserved by valid cognition"?
བུམ-འཛིན-རྟོག-པ-ལ-བུམ-པ-མ-ཡིན-བཞིན-དུ-བུམ-པ-ལྟ-བུར-སྣང-བའི-སྒྲོ-བཏགས-ཀྱི-ཆ	definition of pot's meaning generality (bum pa'i don spyi)
བྱ	(T) change example 4: "special trainee of Guhyasamaja Tantra" to read "intended trainee of Guhyasamaja Tantra" ???
བྱ-བ	Thumi, p.174, has byed for the imperative, but I think the above is correct (T)
བྱ-རྒྱུད	first of the four divisions of tantras, according to the New Translation Schools of Tibetan Buddhism; the other three divisions being: Performance Tantra (spyod rgyud, charyAtantra), Yoga Tantra (rnal 'byor rgyud, yogatantra), and Highest Yoga Tantra (bla med kyi rgyud, anuttarayogatantra) (T)
བྱ-གག-རིམ	a MahAsaMghika school, according to Vasumitra; see Meditation on Emptiness, p.716 (T)
བྱ-རྒོད-ཕུང-པོ-རི	a peak in BIhar, India (?) where Buddha delivered many of the MahAyAna sUtras
བྱ-བ-ངན-ཞེན-གྱི-ལེ-ལོ	laziness which is an attachment to bad activities; Comment: This is one of three types of laziness: laziness of inadequacy (sgyid lug pa'i le lo); laziness which is an attachment to bad activities (bya ba ngan zhen gyi le lo); laziness of neutral activities (snyoms las kyi le lo).
བྱམས-མགོན	can refer to the future Buddha or to the founder of the YogAcAra school; these are the same person, according to some traditions
བྱམས-པ	can refer to the future Buddha or to the founder of the YogAcAra school; these are the same person, according to some traditions
བྱང	Tenses from Thumi, p.174 (T)
བྱང-ས-དང-དེའི-བསྡུ-བ	this reflects Dzong-ka-ba's idea that the Compendium of Ascertainments was intended as a companion work with the Bodhisattva Grounds
བྱང-སྒྲ-མི-སྙན	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
བྱང-སེམས-ཀྱི-མཁྱེན-པ	(PH) no entry for (... sbyor lam) but there is for (...sbyor ba) ? [see also: go sgrub]
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའི-ས	see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཕྱོགས	Do we want to list the sde tshan in Tibetan divisions? (T)
༅བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སེམས	Still don't know who (N) is. Napper, maybe. Should I add definition from don bdun bcu? (T)
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཤིང	this refers to the tree under which ShAkyamuni Buddha attained enlightenment
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-བདུན	see: {བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག}
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-རྣམ-པར-བཞག-པ	see: {བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག}
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-ཏུ-གྱུར-པ-དག	see: {བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཡན་ལག}
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཕྱོགས-མཐུན	see: {བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས}
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཕྱོགས-དང-མཐུན-པ	see: {བྱང་ཆུབ་ཀྱི་ཕྱོགས}
བྱས-པ	Examples: matter (bem po, kanthA); the two; pillar and pot (ka bum gnyis)
བྱས-པ-རྟོགས-པའི-ས	sixth or seventh of the eight Hearer grounds (nyan thos kyi sa brgyad)\nWhich ground is it? (T)
བྱེ-བ	Comment: the word has the sense of "countless."
བྱེ-བྲག	SW added Engl. "region" and ex. 2
བྱེ-བྲག-ཁོ-ན	Comment: illustration: one with thing (dngos po dang gcig) change ex 1 eng to "is necessarily not a generality"?(SW)
བྱེད-རྒྱུ	creative cause; Comment: There are six types of causes: fruitional cause (rnam smin gyi rgyu), co-arisen cause (lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu), creative cause (byed rgyu), cause of similar lot (skal mnyam gyi rgyu), omnipresent cause (kun 'gro'i rgyu), and associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu).
བྱེད-རྒྱུ-ནུས-ལྡན	potent creative cause; Comment: This is one of the two types of creative cause: potent creative cause (byed rgyu nus ldan)and importent creative cause (byed rgyu nus med).
བྱེད-རྒྱུ-ནུས-མེད	Comment: This is one of the two types of creative cause: potent creative cause (byed rgyu nus ldan)and importent creative cause (byed rgyu nus med).
བྱེད-པ-རྒྱུ-མཐུན-གྱི-འབྲས-བུ	functionally causally concordant effect; Comment: This is one of the two types of causally concordant effect (rgyu mthun kyi 'bras bu): functionally causally concordant effect (byed pa rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu) and experientially causually concordant effect (myong ba rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu).
བྱིན-པ	SW added Engl. "calf [of the leg]" and ex.
བྱིང	see: {བྱིང་བ}
བྱིང-བ	laxity; an internal distraction which is a mental factor that causes the destruction of the intensity of clarity in meditative stabilization; laxity is non-defiled and neutral or virtuous; lethargy and laxity are mutually exclusive; see Geshe Lodro, CA, p. 189
བྱིང-ན-གནས-པ	one of the two types of animals (dud 'gro); the other is kha 'thor ba
བྱོན-ནས	see: {བྱོན་པ}
བྱོན-པ	Check tenses. Thumi, p.176, has: 'byon / 'byond / byon / byond (T)
བཟང-བ	SW added this record
བཞུ	Thumi, p.222, lists "bzhu" only as the future of "to melt; to digest" (T)
བཞུས	See comment for record 414 (T)
བཟོ	Tenses and English from Thumi, p.228 (T)
བཟོ-སྦྱངས	see also: phreng can; phreng ba can
བཟོ-སྦྱངས-གཟུགས-ཅན-སྙིང-པོ	King BimbisAra; Comment: King BimbisAra had different names during various stages of his life.
བཟོད-པ	Comment: Ptience is the third of the six perfections. Forbearance/patience is the third of the four levels of the path of preparation. (delete:for others see: sbyor lam) In general, that the term "forbearance" is used for levels of the path indicates an overcoming of non-facility, or fear, with profound doctrine.
བཟོད-པའི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	Comment: This is the third of the six perfections:
བཟོད-པ-བརྒྱད	Comment: These are the eight uninterrupted paths of the path of seeing.
བཟོད-པ-སྨྲ-བ	Comment: p.n. of ShAkyamuni Buddha in a former birth
བཟོཨི-སྦྱོར-གྱི-རྟགས	see also: phreng can; phreng ba can
བཟུང-འཛིན	see: {གཟུང་འཛིན}
བཟུང-འཛིན-རྫས-ཐ-དད-ཀྱིས-སྟོང-པ	Comment: In Ge-luk-b#a scholastic literature, the term "different substantial entity" (rdzas tha dad) is used for impermanent phenomena, whereas "different entity" (ngo bo tha dad) is used for a pair of permanent phenomena, such as uncompounded space and its emptiness, or for a pair of permanent and impermanent phenomena, such as uncompounded space and the valid consciousness apprehending it.
ཅན	English for example six. (T)
ཅང	SW added this record
ཆ	Is example 2 correct—an odd number of opposite form being something should be opposite from being something? (T)
ཆ-བྱད	SW added the Eng. & ex.
ཆ-ལུགས	SW added this entry
ཆ-མཐུན	Check synonym (T)
ཆ-མཉམ-པའི-ཐེ-ཚོམ	one of the three types of doubt (the tshom); see: the tshom for others; example: a doubting consciousness that thinks: sound is maybe permanent or maybe impermanent (sgra rtag gam mi rtag gam snyam pa'i the tshom)
ཆབ	{ཧོན} ?(T)
ཆབ-སྲིད	SW added this record
ཆད-པ	Tibetan of example three seems to be incomplete (T)
ཆད-པར-སྨྲ-བ	Example says chad lta smra ba, not chad par smra ba (T)
ཆལ-བའི-ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས	Used as example for previous entry. Is this one necessary? (T)
ཆེ-གེ	SW added this entry
ཆེ-གེ-མོ	SW added this entry
ཆེད	See: {ཆེད་དུ}
ཆེད-དུ-བརྗོད-པ	Get Eng. and ex from Ship 67a.2. Also add to ched brjod
ཆེད-དུ-ཅི-ཕྱིར	Check others' engl. (T)
ཆེད-དུ-བྱ-བའི-འདུལ-བྱ	JH: do you have an example for this? (SW)
ཆོ-འཕྲུལ	Get Engl and ex. from STTS Skrit and Tib: vikurvitam and Rddhivikurvitam [ck sp]=rtsu 'phrul dang cho 'phrul; get Than's translations for these terms
ཆོས-དབྱིངས	Comment: An equivalent of ultimate truth (don dam bden pa, paramArthasatya) so called because meditation within observing it acts as a cause of the qualities (dharma, chos) of Superiors (Arya, 'phags pa)." Emptiness, being uncaused, is not itself a cause (element), but meditation on it causes the development of marvelous qualities; thus, emptiness comes to be called a cause, an element producing those qualities.
ཆོས-ཁྲིམས	SW added this record
ཆོས-མཆོག	the fourth stage of the path of preparation; the others are: (1) heat (drod); (2) peak (rtse mo); and (3) forbearance (bzod pa)
ཆོས-མངོན	Hackett wants to add "manifest knowledge" to Eng. (SW)
ཆོས-པ	SW added this entry
ཆོས-དབྱིངས-སྟོད-པ	(PH) I added expanded Tibetan & full bib info
ཆོས-བདག-མེད-པ	Definition ? (T)
ཆོས-ཀྱི-ཁམས	phenomenon-constituent; Comment: Among the eighteen constituents, the "phenomenon-constituent" contains all phenomena not included in the other constituents, and thus all permanent phenomena, including thusness, or emptiness, are contained therein. Since all eighteen constituents are said to be bases of emptiness, thusness itself, or emptiness, must also be a basis of emptiness. The same is so for the phenomenon-sense-sphere (chos kyi skye mched, dharmAyatana) among the twelve sense-spheres.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-མིག	eye of doctrine; See: {ཆོས་ཀྱི་སྤྱན}, eye of doctrine
ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ	Shouldn't the Tibetan entry be either "chos rgyal" or "chos kyi rgyal po"? (SW)
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྤྲིན	tenth of the Bodhisattva Superior grounds (byang sems 'phags pa'i sa, Arya-bodhisattva-bhUmi); see byang sems 'phags pa'i sa for others
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	Comment: Among the eighteen constituents, the phenomenon-constituent (chos kyi khams, dharmadhAtu) contains all phenomena not included in the other constituents, and thus all permanent phenomena, including thusness, or emptiness, are contained therein. Since all eighteen constituents are said to be bases of emptiness, thusness itself, or emptiness, must also be a basis of emptiness. The same is so for the "phenomenon-sense-sphere" among the twelve sense-spheres.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-བདག-མེད	See: {ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་ཕྲ་མོ}; {ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་རགས་པ}
ཆོས-ཀྱི-བདག-མེད-ཕྲ-མོ	See: {ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད}; {ཆོས་ཀྱི་བདག་མེད་ཕྲ་མོ}
ཆོས-དང-སྐད-ཅིག-མ-མ-ཡིན-པའི-གཞི-མཐུན-པ	definition of permanent phenomenon (rtag pa)
ཆོས-དེ-དང-རྫས-ཐ-དད-པའི-སྒོ-ནས-ཆོས-དེའི-འབྲས-བུའི-རིགས-སུ-གནས-པ	definition of causal relationship (de byung 'brel)
ཆོས-ཉིད-པ	See: {ཆོས་ཉིད}
ཆོས-ཉིད-ཀྱི-གཟུགས	Comment: One in the triad of imputational form (kun brtags pa'i gzugs), imputed form (rnam par brtags pa'i gzugs), and form of reality (chos nyid kyi gzugs), the last meaning the reality of form in Ge-luk and noumenal form in Jo-nang. These three correspond to the three natures of a form: imputational nature, other-powered nature, and thoroughly established nature of a form.
ཆོས-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of path of accumulation (tshogs lam). ckComment: definition of path of accumulation
ཆོས-མངོན-པར-རྟོགས-པ	ckComment: definition of path of accumulation
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-སྟོང-ཞིང-བདག-མེད-པ	one of the four seals (phyag rgya bzhi)
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-བློ-གནོད-མེད-ལ-སྣང-བའི-དབང-གིས-བཞག-པ-མ-ཡིན-པར-ཡུལ-རང-གི-ཐུན-མོང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-སྡོད-ལུགས-ཀྱི-ངོས-ནས-གྲུབ-པས-སྟོང-པ	definition of subtle selflessness of persons (chos kyi bdag med phra mo)
ཆུ	one of the four elements ('byung bar gyur pa'i reg bya; the others are: earth (sa); fire (me); air (rlung)
ཆུ-བཅུ-བར-བྱ	Check entry (T)
ཆུད-ཟ	See: {ཆུད་མི་ཟ་བ}; {ཆུད་ཟོས་པ}
ཆུད-ཟ-བ	lose; forget
ཆུང-བ	See: {ཆུང}; {ཆུང་ངུ}
ཆུང-ཆུང	See: {ཆུང}; {ཆུང་བ}
ཅི-ཕྱིར	SW added tenses Tib.
ཅི-ཡང-མེད	third of the four formless absorptions (gzugs med bzhi bsam gtan); for others see: {གཟུགས་མེད་བསམ་གཏན}
ཅི-ཡང-མེད-པའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	See: {ཅི་ཡང་མེད}
ཅིའི-ཕྱིར	SW added tenses Tib.
ཅིག-སྒྲ	Check example (T)
ཅུང-ཟད-ལྐོག-གྱུར	one of the two types of hidden phenomenon (lkog gyur), the other being very hidden phenomenon (shin tu lkog gyur)
ད-དྲག	one of the two secondary suffixes, along with sa. It is called hidden, because it is generally not written (?) (T)
ད-གདོད	Comment: An old term for this is ko.
དད-པ	Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
དང-པོའི-པའི-ས	Check entry—po'i pa'i ? (T)
དང-པོར-རེ-ཞིག	ck Tib ex from A's dKyil chog SW added this record
དབང-མངོན	one of the four types of direct perceiver (mngon sum); the others are: (1) mental direct perception (yid mngon); (2) self-knowing direct perception (rang rig mnon sum); (3) yogic direct perception (rnal 'byor mnon sum)
དབང-པོ	Check divisions, I doctored them (T)
དབང-ཤེས	one of the two divisions of consciousness (shes pa); the other is mental cognition (yid shes)
དབང-ཐང	get ex from Ship; get Tshig and Das SW added this record
དབང-བར-བྱ	SW added this record
དབང-བར-བྱས	SW added this record
དབང-བར-བྱེད	SW added this record
དབང-ཤེས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-རྟོག-མེད-ལོག-ཤེས	one of the two types of non-conceptual wrong consciousness; the other is non-conceptual wrong consciousness that is a mental consciousness (yid shes su gyur pa'i rtog med log shes)
དབང-ཤེས-དང-ཡིད-ཤེས-གཉིས	the two divisions of consciousness (shes pa)
དབང-མངོན-བཅད-ཤེས	one of the four types of direct subsequent cognizer; for others see: {མངོན་སུམ་བཅད་ཤེས}
དབང-པོའི-མངོན-སུམ	see: {དབང་མངོན}
དབང-པོ-དུརག	one of the divisions of "various constituents" (khams tha dad pa) (PH)
དབང-པོ-ལྔ	see: {དབང་པོ}
དབང-པོ-རྣོ-བ-ཉིད	Check entry—should it be "rnon ba"? (T)
དབང-པོ-ལྔ-རྣམས-གཞན-གྱུར	see: {དབང་པོ}
དབང-གི-མི-མཐུན-པའི-ཕྱོགས	English should be "non-concordance", no? (T)
དབོན	SW added this record
དབོན-པོ	SW added this record
དབུ-མ-པ	one of the two main schools of MahAyAna Buddhism; the other is Mind-Only (sems tsam, citta-mAtra)
དབུ-མ-ཆེན-པོ	Comment: A syncretic system propounded by Dol-b#o-b#a S#hay-rap-gyel-tsen. Synonyms include Ultimate Mind-Only (don dam pa'i sems tsam), Final Mind-Only (mthar thug gi sems tsam), and Supramundane Mind-Only ('jig rten las 'das pa'i sems tsam). (PH) added this note here & in synonyms. check
དབུ-མ-ལ-འཇུག-པ	Comment: Here avatAra means "addition" in the sense that ChandrakIrti's text is a supplement historically necessary so as to clarify the meaning of NAgArjuna's Treatise on the Middle.
དབུ-མ-ཐལ-འགྱུར-པ	this is also the title of a work from: Clear Exposition of the Presentation of Tenets (grub pa'i mtha'i rnam par bzhag pa gsal bar bshad pa, PrAsaGgika-MAdhyamaka section), by Jang-gya Rol-bay-dor-jay (lcang skya rol pa'i rdo rje,1717-1786); translated with commentary by Jeffrey Hopkins, unpublished manuscript
དབུ-མ-རྩ-བའི-འགྲེལ-པ-བུདད-པཱ-ལི-ཏ	Comment: The author's name has come to be included in the title.
དབུ-མའི-བསྟན-བཅོས	one of NAgArjuna's Six Collections of Reasonings; for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས་དྲུག}
དབུལ	Thumi, p.160, has: dbul / 'bul / phul / 'buld (T)
དབྱིབས	one of the two divisions of form-source (gzugs kyi skye mched, rUpAyatana); the other is color (kha dog)
དབྱིབས-དང-ཁ-དོག	see: {དབྱིབས}
དབྱིག	SW added this record
དབྱིག-གཉེན	(PH) give name of Abhidharmakoza in English?
དེ-ཉིད-གོང-མས	(PH) I think the sa-'jug on "gong ma" is an instrumental & should be removed.
དེ-བས-ན	SW added this record. Is it the full form of "des na"?
དེ-ལྟ-བུ-བྱུང-བའི-སྡེ	a section of the Basket of Discourses (sutrA piTaka) ?? (T)
དེ-ལྟ-བས-ན	should this entry be de lta r bas na? (SW)
དེ-མ-ཐག-རྐྱེན	one of the four types of conditions; for others see: {རྐྱེན}
དེ-བཞིན-ཉིད	Comment: An equivalent of ultimate truth (don dam bden pa, paramArthasatya) so called because whether Buddhas arise or not it permanently abides thus without changing.
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པའི-སྤྲུལ-པ	needs Tib sort code
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-དང-ལྡན-པ	needs Tib sort code
དེ-རིང-གི-དུས-སུ-མ-འོངས-པའི-དོན-མངོན-པར-འདོད-པའི-རྟོག-པ	example of wishing consciousness (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa)
དེ-རིང-གི-དུས-སུ-འདས-པའི-དོན-དྲན-པའི-རྟོག-པ	example of remembering consciousness (dran pa'i rtog pa)
དེ-ཁོ-ན-ཉིད-དུ-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight types of object of negation (dgag bya) in the PrAsaGgika system (and one of five in the SvAtantrika system); for others see: {དགག་བྱ}
དེ-ཁོ-ན-ཉིད-ཀྱི-ལྷ	suchness deity; Comment: This is the first of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
དེ-རང-བདག-གཅིག-འབྲེལ	Example: pot and pot's isolate (bum pa dang bum pa'i ldog pa)
དེ-འདྲེན-མི-ནུས-པར-ཕྱིས-འབྱུང-ཐ-སྙད-པའི-ཚད-མ-གཞན-ལ-བརྟེན-དགོས-པའི-གསར-དུ-མི-སླུ-བའི-རིག-པ	Comment: This is the definition of a direct perception whose ascertainment is induced by another (gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma).
དེར-གྱུར-པའི-དབང-མངོན	one of the three types of awareness to which an object appears but is not ascertained (snang la ma nges); for others see: {སྣང་ལ་མ་ངེས}
དགའ-ལྡན	Comment: The other two large monasteries near Hla-s#a that constitute the Three Seats are S#e-ra (se rwa) and Dre-b#ung ('bras spungs).
དགའ-བ-སྡུད-པའི-ཡིད-བྱེད	Comment: One of the seven preparations (nyer bsdogs, samAtaka) for a concentration (bsam gtan, dhyAna).
དགའ-རབ-དབང-ཕྱུག	Comment: An epithet of the God of Desire ('dod lha, kAmadeva).
དགག	Comment: See dgag pa.
དགག-པ	Comment: Negative phenomenon (dgag pa) is equivalent to gzhan sel (exlusion of the other, other-exclusion [anyApoha]). Examples are rtag pa ma yin pa (non-permanent); bum pa ma yin pa las log pa (opposite from non-pot).
དགག-སྒྲུབ-གཉིས	Comment: Positive and negative phenomena are one of the divisions of gzhi grub (established base), i.e., existents (yod pa).
དགག-གཞི-ཅན-གྱི-ཆོས	Comment: A phenomenon that is absent somewhere.
དགག-པ-དངོས-སུ-རྟོགས-པའི-ཚད-མ	Comment: The aspect of an object must appear in cases when the realization is explicit.
དགག-པའི-རྣམ-པ-ཤར-ནས-དགག-པ-ལ-གསར-དུ-མི-བསླུ-བའི-རིག-པ	Comment: This is the definition of direct perception explicitly realizing a negative phenomenon (dgag pa dngos su rtogs pa'i tshad ma).
དགག-བཞག-སྤོང-གསུམ	Comment: The first of the three also is taken as 'khrul pa dgag pa (refuting mistake/error).
དགེ	Comment: See dge ba.
དགེ-བ	virtue; Comment: Virtuous mental factors are one of six main groupings of mental factors (sems byung, caitta): (1) five omnipresent (kun 'gro, sarvatraga) mental factors; (2) five determining (yul nges, viSaya-pratiniyama) mental factors; (3) eleven virtuous (dge ba, kuzala) mental factors; (4) six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUla-kleza); (5) twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyong, upakleza); and (6) four changeable (gzhan 'gyur, anyathAbhAva) mental factors. "Indicated" or "revealed" (lung du bstan pa) means here "that which abides as either virtue or non-virtue." Thus, in this case of defining virtue, it means that which is virtuous. It means that which is definite as virtuous or non-virtuous. It does not necessarily refer to Buddha's having said it this way or that way which is what those words often mean ("indicated in scripture"). "Abides in the class of that which issues forth happiness" is said because there are, for instance, virtues which have been overcome by hatred and do not issue forth happiness, but they are still virtues. The phrase means that there are exceptions that merely "abide in the class of."
དགེ-ལུགས	Comment: See dge lugs pa.
དགེ-རྩ	Comment: See also dge ba (virtue).
དགེ-མི-དགེ-གང-དུ-ལུང-དུ-མ-བསྟན-པ	Comment: Explanation of lung du ma bstan pa (not indicated/revealed).
དགེ-སོགས-གསུམ	Comment: The three are dge ba (virtue), mi dge ba (non-virtue), and lung du ma bstan pa (neutral); this is one of the divisions of established base (gzhi grub).
དགེ-བསྙེན-དང-དགེ-བསྙེན-མ-གཉིས	Comment: the two divisions of householders (khyim pa, gRhastha).
དགེ-ལུགས-པ	Comment: The sect probably was originally called the "Joyous Way" (dga' ldan pa'i lugs) after the monastic university called "Joyous" (dga' ldan) established by D#zong-ka-b#a in 1409.
དགེ-བའི-ཆོས	Comment: See chos.
དགེ-བའི-རྩ-བ	Comment: The three virtuous roots (dge ba'i rtsa ba, kuzalamUla) are: (1) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (2) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha).
དགེ-བའི-གྲོགས-པོ	Comment: See dge ba'i bshes gnyen.
དགེ-འདུན-ཕལ-ཆེན-པ	Comment: One of the eighteen so called HInayAna schools; thought to be an early precursor of MahAyAna.
དགོངས	dgongs pa; Comment: See dgongs pa.
དགོངས-གཞི	Comment: The first in the triad of factors involved in passages requiring interpretation—the basis in [Buddha's] thought (dgongs gzhi), purpose (dgos pa), and damage to the explicit [rendering] (dngos la gnod byed). dgongs should not be translated as "intention," since this would too easily be confused with dgos pa ("purpose" or "intention").
དགོངས-གཞི-དང-དངོས-ལ-གནོད-བྱེད	Comment: The first and third in the triad of factors involved in passages requiring interpretation—the basis in [Buddha's] thought (dgongs gzhi), purpose (dgos pa), and damage to the explicit [rendering] (dngos la gnod byed)
དགོངས-པ-བཞི	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention," but this does not accord with the following:\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.
དགོངས-པ-ཅན	Comment: See dgongs pa.
དགྲ-བཅོམ	Comment: Arhan/ arhant (dgra bcom pa) is translated as "Foe Destroyer" to accord with the usual Tibetan translation of the term and to assist in capturing the flavor of oral and written traditions that frequently refer to this etymology. Arhats have overcome the foe which is the afflictive emotions (nyon mongs, kleza), the chief of which is ignorance, the conception (according to the Consequence School) that persons and phenomena are established by way of their own character.\n The Indian and Tibetan translators were also aware of the etymology of arhant as "worthy one," as they translated the name of the "founder" of the Jaina system, Arhat, as mchod 'od "Worthy of Worship" (see Jam-y#ang-shay-b#a's Great Exposition of Tenets, ka, 62a.3). Also, they were aware of ChandrakIrti's gloss of the term as "Worthy One" in his Clear Words: "Because of being worthy of worship by the world of gods, humans, and demi-gods, they are called Arhats" (sadevamAnuøAsurAl lokAt pUnArhatvAd arhannityuchyate [Poussin, 486.5], lha dang mi dang lha ma yin du bcas pa'i 'jig rten gyis mchod par 'os pas dgra bcom pa zhes brjod la [P5260, vol. 98 75.2.2]). Also, they were aware of Haribhadra's twofold etymology in his Illumination of the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom SUtra. In the context of the list of epithets qualifying the retinue of Buddha at the beginning of the sUtra (see Unrai Wogihara, ed., AbhisamayAla™kArAlokA PrajJA-pAramitA-vyAkhyA, The Work of Haribhadra [Tokyo: The Toyo Bunko, 1932-5; reprint ed., Tokyo: Sankibo Buddhist Book Store, 1973], 8.18), Haribhadra says, "They are called arhant [=Worthy One, from root arh 'to be worthy'] since they are worthy of worship, religious donations, and being assembled together in a group, etc." (W9.8-9: sarva evAtra pUjA-dakøi˜A-ga˜a-parikarøAdy-Arhatayar-han-taH; P5189, 67.5.7: 'dir thams cad kyang mchod pa dang // yon dang tshogs su 'dub la sogs par 'os pas na dgra bcom pa'o).\nAlso, "They are called arhant [= Foe Destroyer, arihan] because they have destroyed (hata) the foe (ari)."\n(W10.18: hatAritvAd arhantaH; P5189, 69.3.6. dgra rnams bcom pas na dgra bcom pa'o). Thus, this is a considered preference in the face of alternative etymologies—"Foe Destroyer" requiring a not unusual i infix to make ari-han, ari meaning enemy and han meaning to kill, and thus "Foe Destroyer." Unfortunately, one word in English cannot convey both this meaning and "Worthy of Worship"; thus, I have gone with what clearly has become the predominant meaning in Tibet. (For an excellent discussion of the two etymologies of "Arhat" in Buddhism and Jainism, see L.M. Joshi's "Facets of Jaina Religiousness in Comparative Light," L.D. Series 85, [Ahmedabad: L.D. Institute of Indology, May 1981], 53-58).
དགྲ-བཅོམ-པ	Comment: See dgra bcom.
དགྲ-བཅོམ-པའི-མཁྱེན-པ	exalted knower of a Foe Destroyer; Comment: dgra bcom pa'i mkhyen pa, dgra bcom pa'i mi slob lam, dgra bcom pa'i nyon sgrib spangs pa'i ye shes (exalted knower of a Foe Destroyer, path of no more learning of a Foe Destroyer, exalted wisdom of a Foe Destroyerthat has abandoned the afflictive obstructions) are equivalent.
དགྲ-བཅོམ-ཞུགས-པ	Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
དགྲ-བཅོམ-འབྲས-གནས	Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
དགུ	Comment: "Nine" may come to mean "all" due to the fact that there are nine levels in cyclic existence.
དཀར-པོ-རྣམ-པར-མཐོང-བའི-ས	Comment: The first of the eight Lesser Vehicle grounds (dman pa sa brgyad): (1) the ground of seeing the wholesome, (2) the ground of lineage, (3) the ground of the eighth, (4) the ground of seeing, (5) the ground of diminishment, (6) the ground of separation from desire, (7) the ground of realizing completion/accomplishment, (8) the ground of Solitary Realizers.
དཀོན-མཆོག	Comment: As in the Three Jewels (Buddha, his doctrine, and the spiritual community).
དཀོན-མཆོག-འཇིགས-མེད-དབང-པོ	Comment: He is the next incarnation of Jam-y#ang-shay-b#a Nga-w#ang-d#zön-drü ('jam dbyangs bzhad pa ngag dbang brtson 'grus) of L#a-brang D#ra-s#hi-kyil (bla brang bkra shis 'khyil).
དཀྱིལ-འཁོར	Comment: There are a maNDala of the residence and a maNDala of residents (rten dang brten pa'i dkyil 'khor).
དམག-ལྡན-གཟུགས-ཅན-སྙིང-པོ	King BimbisAra; Comment: King BimbisAra had different names during various stages of his life.
དམན-པའི-ས-པ	(PH) Tib. divisions too long.
དམན-པའི-ང-རྒྱལ	pride of inferiority; Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
དམར-པོ	one of the four primary colors (rtsa ba'i kha dog); the others are: white (dkar po); yellow (ser po); blue (sngon po)
དམིགས-པ	this is the object of observation as opposed to the subjective aspect (rnam pa), one of the five concordances (mtshungs ldan lnga); for others see: {མཚུངས་ལྡན}
དམིགས-རྐྱེན	one of the four types of condition; for others see: {རྐྱེན}
དམིགས-ཡུལ	Comment: In the Mind-Only School, the thoroughly established nature is the final object of observation by a path of purification, and indeed such a path observes, or apprehends, it; however, despite the fact that phenomena such as chairs are objects of observation of a path of purification, they are not observed or apprehended by it — they are only bases with respect to which emptiness is realized. Hence, the term "object of observation" in this context, as it has come to used in Ge-luk-b#a scholarship, is somewhat misleading. The usage of the term " objects of observation" even for objects that are not being observed may have come from systems that hold that even during direction perception of emptiness the phenomena qualified by emptiness still appear; this is called "meditative equipoise with appearance" (mnyam bzhag snang bcas). D#zong-ka-b#a earlier in his life held this notion but then switched to the opinion that the objects qualified by emptiness do not appear during meditative equipoise (mnyam bzhag snang med). His own commentary (legs bshad gser 'phreng) on Maitreya's Ornament for Clear Realization reflects his earlier notion, whereas his student Gyel-tsap's commentary (rnam bzhad snying po rgyan) reflects his later view.
དམིགས-པའི-རྐྱེན	see: {དམིགས་རྐྱེན}
དམྱལ	see: {དམྱལ་བ}
དམྱལ-བ	one of the six tyes of ordinary beings (so so'i skye bo; pRthag-jana); for others see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
དམྱལ-བ-པ	see: {དམྱལ་བ}
དམྱལ-བའི-རྟེན-ཅན-གྱི-སོ-སོའི-སྐྱེ-བོ	see: {དམྱལ་བ}
དངོས-འབྲས	direct effect; Comment: There are two types of effects: direct effect (dngos 'bras) and indirect effect (rgyud 'bras).
དངོས-མེད	Comment: See dngos med kyi chos and dngos po med.
དངོས-རྒྱུ	direct cause; Comment: There are two types of causes, direct cause (dngos rgyu) and indirect cause (brgyud rgyu).
དངོས-པོའི-བསྐྱེད-བྱ	Comment: This is the definition of effect of thing (dngos po'i 'bras bu).
དངོས-པོའི-རྫས-ཡོད-ཆོས-གསུམ-ཚང-བ	Comment: This is the definition of thing's definition (dngos po'i mtshan nyid).
དངོས-པོའི-དངོས-སུ-བསྐྱེད-བྱ	Comment: This is the definition of direct effect of thing (dngos po'i dngos 'bras).
དངོས-པོའི-བྱེ-བྲག	Comment: Examples of an instance of thing are pot (bum pa) and pillar (ka ba).
དངོས-པོའི-བརྒྱུད-ནས-བསྐྱེད-བྱ	Comment: This is the definition of indirect effect of thing (dngos po'i brgyud 'bras).
དངོས-པོའི-གནས-ལུགས	Comment: "Subsistence" here does not mean "merely getting by" as it does with subsistence farming; rather, it means "existence" or "persisting existence."
དངོས-པོའི-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of thing's cause (dngos po'i rgyu).
དངོས-སུ-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of direct cause (dngos rgyu).
དངོས-སྟོབས-རྗེས-དཔག	Comment: This is one of the three divisions of inference (rjes dpag)—inference through power of the fact (dngos stobs rjes dpag), inference through renown (grags pa'i rjes dpag), and inference through belief (yid ches rjes dpag).
དངོས-པོ-རང-གི-རྫས-རྒྱུན-དུ-གཙོ-བོར-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of substantial cause of thing (dngos po'i nyer len).
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པའི-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད	Comment: In Jo-nang non-entities here are imputational natures, which include other-powered natures, and thus are all conventionalities.
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པའི-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	Comment: Dol-b#o-b#a S#hay-rap-gyel-tsen explains that this means the emptiness that is the ultimate nature which is the opposite of non-entities, or conventionalities (kun rdzob las bzlog pa don dam pa'i ngo bo nyid). Non-entities here are imputational natures which include other-powered natures and thus are all conventionalities. In Ge-luk-b#a explanations, this emptiness is the emptiness of the nature of non-entities, that is to say, the emptiness of the inherent existence of non-things, or non-products.
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	Comment: In Jo-nang, this is the emptiness of imputational natures which here include other-powered natures.
དངོས-མེད-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད	Comment: In Jo-nang non-entities here are imputational natures, which include other-powered natures, and thus are all conventionalities.
དངོས-མེད-ཀྱི-ཆོས	Comment: In the SUtra School and above, illustrations of phenomena which are non-things, that is to say, which exist but do not perform the function of creating effects, are object of knowledge (shes bya); the two, permanent and functioning thing (rtag dngos gnyis); uncompounded space ('dus ma byas kyi nam mkha').
དོན-འགྱུར	Compare: {ཚིག་འགྱུར}, literal translation
དོན-བསྡུས	get ex Buddhag's Mahavairo commentary; Tshig 1305.1 SW added this entry
དོན-དམ	See: {དོན་དམ་པ}
དོན-ལྡོག	one of the four types of isolates; for others see: {ལྡོག་པ}
དོན-སྤྱི	one of the three types of generality (spyi); for others see: {སྤྱི༏་སེཨེ་ཨལསོ༔་བུམ་པའི་དོན་སྤྱི}
དོན-བསྡུས-པ	get ex Buddhag's Mahavairo commentarySW added this entry; needs Tib sort code
དོན-དམ-པ	Comment: An equivalent of ultimate truth (don dam bden pa, paramArthasatya) so called because it is the object of the activity of Superiors' exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise; "highest" (dam pa, parama) is taken as the exalted wisdom of uncontaminated meditative equipoise, and "object" (don, artha) is taken as the thusness, or emptiness, that is the object of that exalted wisdom, whereby thusness is called the truth that is the object of the highest [wisdom] (dam pa'i don, paramasya artha-satya). In another interpretation, that wisdom itself is called the highest object (don dam pa, parama-artha), since it is both highest and object; emptiness is called the truth of the highest object (don dam pa'i bden pa, parama-arthasya satya).
དོན-དམ-པའི-ལྷ	ultimate deity; Comment: This is the first of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
དོན-དམ-པའི-སེམས-ཙམ	Comment: A syncretic system propounded by Dol-b#o-b#a S#hay-rap-gyel-tsen. Synonyms include Great Middle Way (dbu ma chen po), Final Mind-Only (mthar thug gi sems tsam), and Supramundane Mind-Only ('jig rten las 'das pa'i sems tsam).
དོན-དམ-པའི-བདེན-པ	See: {དོན་དམ་བདེན་པ}
དོན-དམ-པའི-ཆོས-མངོན-པ	(PH) does "ultimate" here refer to "Mahayana" Abhidharma? if so, add "[of the Great Vehicle]" to Eng. equiv?
དོན-དམ-ཡང-དག-འཕགས	p.n. of a tenth ground Bodhisattva who questions the Buddha in the seventh chapter of the SaMdhi-nirmocana-sUtra
དོན-དམ-པ-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ	Comment: This is one of the three non-natures: character-non-nature (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); production-non-nature (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); ultimate-non-nature (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).\n "Ultimate-non-nature" has two meanings. The first meaning refers to thoroughly established natures, which are the actual ultimate-non-nature since they are both (1) the ultimate as the object of observation by a path of purification and (2) the very non-nature, that is, the absence of the opposite of emptiness in phenomena. The second meaning refers to fact that other-powered natures are not the ultimate; just as other-powered natures are natureless in terms of (self-)production, so they are natureless in terms of the ultimate — that is to say, they lack being that nature which is the ultimate. Thus, thoroughly established natures are "ultimate-non-natures," and other-powered natures are also "ultimate-non-natures" but for different reasons--the first is the ultimate and the second is not.
དོན-དམ-པ-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ-ཉིད	Comment: See don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa.
དོན-དམ-པ-ངོ-བོ-མེད-པ	one of the three non-entitynesses related to the three characters in the Mind-Only School; the others are non-entityness in terms of character (mtshan nyid ngo bo med pa; lakSaNa-niHsvabhAvatA) and non-entityness in terms of production (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa; utpattiniHsvabhAvatA) (T)
དོན-དམ-པར-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight types of object of negation (dgag bya) in the PrAsaGgika system (and one of five in the SvAtantrika system); for others see: {དགག་བྱ}
དོན-དམ-པར-དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-པའི-ཆོས	definition of ultimate truth (don dam bden pa)
དོན-དམ-པར-དོན-བྱེད-མི-ནུས-པའི-ཆོས	definition of conventional truth (kun rdzob bden pa)
དོན-དམ-བདེན-པ	ultimate truths are understood in different ways by the various Buddhist systems; see definition headingComment: The Sanskrit for "ultimate truth," paramArthasatya, is etymologized three ways within identifying parama as "highest" or "ultimate," artha as "object," and satya as "truth." In the first way, parama (highest, ultimate) refers to a consciousness of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness; artha (object) refers to the object of that consciousness, emptiness; and satya (truth) also refers to emptiness in that in direct perception emptiness appears the way it exists; that is, there is no discrepancy between the mode of appearance and the mode of being. In this interpretation, a paramArthasatya is a "truth-that-is-an-object-of-the-highest-consciousness." In the second way, both parama (highest, ultimate) and artha (object) refer to a consciousness of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness in that, in the broadest meaning of "object," both objects and subjects are objects, and a consciousness of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness is the highest consciousness and thus highest object; satya (truth), as before, refers to emptiness. In this second interpretation, a paramArthasatya is an emptiness that exists the way it appears to a highest consciousness, a "truth-of-a-highest-object." In the third etymology, all three parts refer to emptiness in that an emptiness is the highest (the ultimate) and is also an object and a truth, a "truth-that-is-the-highest-object." ChandrakIrti, the chief Consequentialist, favors the third etymology in his Clear Words
དོན-རང-མཚན-གྱི-བློའི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the three types of other-eliminator that is a factual specifically characterized phenomenon (don rang mtshan gyi gzhan sel); for others see: {དོན་རང་མཚན་གྱི་གཞན་སེལ}
དོན-རང-མཚན-གྱི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the two types of other-eliminator that is an affirming negative (ma yin dgag gi gzhan sel); the other is other-eliminator that is a mind (blo'i gzhan sel)
དོན-རང-མཚན-གྱི-དོན-རང-མཚན-གྱི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the three types of other-eliminator that is a factual specifically characterized phenomenon (don rang mtshan gyi gzhan sel); for others see: {དོན་རང་མཚན་གྱི་གཞན་སེལ}
དོན-རང-མཚན-གྱི-མེད-དགག-གི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the three types of other-eliminator that is a factual specifically characterized phenomenon (don rang mtshan gyi gzhan sel); for others see: {དོན་རང་མཚན་གྱི་གཞན་སེལ}
དོན-གོམས-པ-ཅན-གྱི-དབང-མངོན-གྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the five types of direct perceiver which induces ascertainment from itself (rang las nges kyi tshad ma); for others see: {རང་ལས་ངེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ}
དོན-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of path of preparation (sbyor lam)\n(PH) Since this is the def. of Path of Prep., should it really be listed as a syn.?
དོན-དོན-དམ-པ	object-ultimate; Comment: This is one of the three meanings of ultimate (don dam, paramArtha) according to Matireya's Differentiation of the Middle and Extremes (III.11ab): object-ultimate (don don dam, i.e., thusness); attainment-ultimate (thob pa don dam, i.e., nirvANa); and practice-ultimate (sgrub pa don dam, true paths). BJ calls them terminological divisions, not actual divisions.
དོན-གཞན-ལ-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention," but this does not accord with the following:\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.
དོན-དུ-གཉེར	See: {དོན་གཉེར}
དོན-བྱེད-སྣང-ཅན-གྱི-དབང-མངོན-གྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the five types of direct perceiver whose ascertainment is induced by itself (rang las nges kyi tshad ma); for others see: {རང་ལས་ངེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ}
དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-པ	Comment: This is the definition of thing (dngos po). In the Great Exposition School even permanent phenomena have the capacity to perform a function, such as uncompounded space capacity to allow the placement or movement of objects. In the SUtra School and above, having the capacity to perform a function refers to the function of producing effects, and thus the reference is only to impermanent phenomena.
དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-སྟོང-གི-ཆོས	definition of non-functioning thing (dnos med kyi chos)
དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-པའི-བཏགས-ཡོད-ཆོས-གསུམ-ཚང-བ	definition of the definiendum of able to perform a function (don byed nus pa'i mtshon bya) (T)
དོན-རྣམ-སྒོམ-པ	meditation on the aspect of an object [e.g., meditating on impermanence]; Comment: There are two types of meditation, meditation on the aspect of an object [e.g., meditating on impermanence] (don rnam sgom pa) and meditative cultivation of the aspect of a subject [e.g., meditatively cultivating compassion] (shes rnam sgom pa). The first means to meditate on an object, and the second means to meditatively cultivate a consciousness, an attitude.
དོན-མི-འགྱུར-གྱི-ཐེ-ཚོམ	one of the three types of doubt; for others see: {ཐེ་ཚོམ}
དོན-འགྱུར-གྱི-ཐེ-ཚོམ	one of the three types of doubt (the tshom); for others see: {ཐེ་ཚོམ}
དོན-གྱི-སྡེ-ཚན-དག-གི-མདོ	Comment: In the PAli canon: ATThakavagga, the thirteenth sutta of the MahAviyuhasutta in the fourth section of the Sutta NipAta.
དོན-གྱི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the two types of other-eliminator that is an affirming negative (ma yin dgag gi gzhan sel); the other is other-eliminator that is a mind (blo'i gzhan sel)
དོན-སྤྱི-ཁོ-ན-འཛིན-པའི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: need to give an instance
དོན-སྤྱི-བཟུང-ཡུལ-དུ-བྱེད-པའི-རྟོག-པ	one of the types of knowledge and awareness according to the threefold division
དོན-སྤྱི-སྒྲ-སྤྱི-གནས-སུ-ཕྱེ-བའི-དོན-སྤྱི	one of the two types of meaning generality
དོར	ck Lag for ex ("cast")
དཔའ-བོ	Comment: identified as AshvaghoSha.
དཔལ	Sw changed Engl from "glorious Lo-sang-drak-ba" to "glory of Lo-sang-drak-ba". Should it be "to the glory that is Lo-sang-drak-ba"?
དཔལ-གྱི-བེའུ	get from M-W
དཔལ-གྱི-ཁབ	get Engl and ex from Ship 64b.2
དཔེ	get ex. from Ship
དཔེ-བྱད	get ex. from Ship SW added Eng. and ex.
དཔེ-ཆ	get "rgya dpe" example from Ship
དཔེ-ལ-བརྟེན-གྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the four types of tshad ma according to DharmakIrti; for others see: {ཚད་མ}
དཔུང-བཟང-གིས-ཞུས-པ-ཞེས-བྱ-བའི-རྒྱུད	Comment: This is one of the four General Action Tantras.
དཔྱད-གསུམ-གྱིས-དག-པའི-ལུང	Check ex 1 Engl. (T)
དཔྱོད-པ	one of the four changeable mental factors (gzhan 'gyur bzhi; catur-anyathAbhAva); for others see: {གཞན་འགྱུར}
དཔྱོད-པ-བ	MImAMsa is one of the four orthodox (astika) schools of Indian philosophy
དཔྱོད-པ-ཅན	MImAMsa is one of the four orthodox (astika) schools of Indian philosophy
དཔྱོད-པ-ཡིད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the fifth of the seven mental contemplations involved in developing a concentration (bsam gtan, dhyAna).
དྲག-པོ	In the Eng. does heavy = sra ba? More likely it's hard=sra ba (SW)
དྲན-པ	one of the five determining factors (yul nges nga, paJca-viSaya-pratiniyama); for others see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
དྲན-པའི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
དྲན-པ-ནེར-གཞག	see: {དྲན་པ་ཉེ་བར་བཞག་པ}
དྲང	(PGH) shouldn't this be "interpretable"?
དྲང-དོན	Comment: Literally this would be translated as "a meaning that must be led."
དྲང-བའི-དོན	Comment: Literally this would be translated as "a meaning that must be led."
དྲང-སྲོང-སྨྲ-བ	name of a park near Benaras where Buddha delivered many of his sermons
དྲང-སྲོང-སྨྲ-བ-རི-དགས-ཀྱི-ནགས	a park near Benares where Buddha delivered many of his sermons
དྲང-སྲོང-ལྷུང-བ-རི-དྭགས-ཀྱི-གནས	a park near Benares where Buddha delivered many of his sermons
དྲེད	Comment: a big animal with a large forehead that will rise up and even grab a person and tear it in half -- its feet being like a human's but it does not have heels; it has a white spot on the the chest and is yellow or black.
དྲེགས-པ	Comment: referring to a quality of mind.
དྲི-མ	compare: {ཟག་པ} (contaminant, contamination) and {སྒྲིབ་པ} (obstruction, defiled)
དྲི-ཟར	see: {དྲི་ཟ}
དྲི-འཛིན-དབང-མངོན	one of the five types of sense direct perceivers; the others correspond to the other senses
དྲི-མ-མེད-པ	second of the ten Bodhisattva grounds (sa, bhUmi); for others see: {ས}
དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-ས	see previous entry
དྲི-ཟར-བཅས-པ	see: {དྲི་ཟ}
དྲིའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	odor sense-sphere; Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external form (phyi'i gzugs): form sense-sphere (gzugs kyi skye mched); (2) sound sense-sphere (sgra'i skye mched); (3) odor sense-sphere (dri'i skye mched); (4) taste sense-sphere (ro'i skye mched); (5) tangible object sense-sphere (reg bya'i skye mched).
དྲོ-བ	see: {དྲོད}, heat
དྲོ-བར-གྱུར-བ	heat; see: {དྲོད}, heat
དྲོད	first part of the path of preparation (sbyor lam); the others are: peak (rtse mo); forbearance (bzod pa); and supreme mundane qualities (chos mchog)
དྲོད-རྩེ-སྦྱོར	Comment: This is the second of four levels of the path of preparation.
དུ-བའི-དངོས-སུ-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	definition of direct cause of smoke (du ba'i dngos rgyu)
དུད-འགྲོའི-རྟེན-ཅན-གྱི-སོ-སོའི-སྐྱེ-བོ	one of the six types of beings
དུམ-བུ	get ex from Ship on length of YT texts SW added entry. Sanskrit is from Das (p.630), for which there is no abbreviation
དུང-དཀར-སེར-པོར-སྣང-བའི-དབང-ཤེས	example of a mistaken consciousness that is a sense consciousness (dbang shes su gyur pa'i log shes)
དུས	one of the five associational causes (mtshungs ldan lnga); for others see: {མཚུངས་ལྡན}
དུས-འཁོར	name of a Tantra
དུས-ཆོགས	Check entry ? (T)
དུས-སུ-སྨྲ-བ	Wylie entry originally had: dus su smra smra ba but double smra doesn't mirror Sanskrit, so I took it out. (T)
དུས-ནམ-ཞིག-ན	SW added this record
དུས-མཐའི-སྐད-ཅིག-མ-གྱུར-པའི-བུམ-པ	example of something that is only a creative cause (byed rgyu)should this be "skad cig mar"? (SW)
དུས-བརྟེན-པའི-རྟག-པ	one of the divisions of rtag pa (permanent phenomenon); the other is occasional permanent (res 'ga' ba'i rtag pa)
དུས-གཞན-ལ-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention," but this does not accord with the following:\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.
དྭ-བ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.164) identifies this as "a type of typhonium giganteum. Engl.: arisaema intermedium; arisaema lobatum; arisaema consanguineum" Add?
དྭངས-མ	get ex SW added this entry Tshig 1313.1
དྭོགས	see: {དོགས}, {དོགས་པ}\ncompare: {ཐེ་ཚོམ}, doubt
གཡེར-མ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.165) identifies this as "zanthoxylum" Add?
གཡོ	zAThya; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
གཡོ-ལྡན	Comment: This is one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
གཡོས	SW added Eng. "stir"
ག-ལེར	Comment: Nga-w#ang-lek-den (ngag dbang legs ldan) suggested that ga le may have derived from gang legs (whatever is good).
ག-ལས-འཇིགས-མེད	Comment: Some attribute the text to NAgArjuna, but others cite the fact that the text quotes A#ryadeva as evidence that it could not have been composed by NAgArjuna, who was A#ryadeva's teacher. Ge-s#hay Ge-dün-l#o-drö suggested that this may also be the name of the author of the commentary, the text having been given the name of the author as is the case with the BuddhapAlita Commentary on NAgArjuna's Treatise on the Middle.
གལ-ཏེ	Comment: Usually used with na.
གམ	Comment: One of ten particles used with a disjunctive ("or") or conjunctive ("and") sense.
གང-བ	Comment: rab tu gang ba = pratipUrNa(MSA).
གང-དག	Comment: Used often as a correlative with de dag.
གང-གིས	Comment: Used often as a correlative with de.
གང-ཕྱིར	Comment: Used often as a correlative with de phyir.
གང-ཚེ	Comment: Often used as a correlative with de'i tshe.
གང-ཡང	Comment: See gang rung.
གང-ཟག	Comment: Ken-sur Nga-w#ang-lek-den etymologized this is "full-fall", i.e., one who is filled with the afflictions and has fallen into cyclic existence. As he said, this is not true of all persons, because even a Buddha, for instance, is a person. It is to be noted that animals, for instance, are persons. It is said that in general "self" (bdag, Atman) "person," and "I" (nga, ahaM) are equivalent, but in the particular context of the selflessness of persons "self" and "person" are not at all equivalent and do not at all have the same meaning. In the term "selflessness of persons," "self" refers to a falsely imagined status that needs to be refuted, whereas "persons" refers to existent beings who are the bases with respect to which that refutation is made. All four Buddhist schools, therefore, hold that persons exist; they do not claim that persons are mere fictions of ignorance. The schools hold differing opinions on the nature of the person. According to Ge-luk-b#a scholars, all except the Middle Way Consequence School posit something from within the bases of imputation of a person — usually either mind or the collection of mind and body — as being the person. In contrast, the Consequence School holds that, even though a person is imputed in dependence upon mind and body (in the Formless Realm, a person is imputed in dependence only on mind), the person is neither mind nor body nor a collection of mind and body, since it is just the I that is imputed in dependence upon mind and body. Following the lead of ChandrakIrti, recognized by most as the founder of the Consequence School, Ge-luk-b#a scholars identify how in the other schools some factor among the five aggregates (forms, feelings, discriminations, compositional factors, and consciousnesses) or the collection of them is considered to be the person when sought analytically from among its bases of imputation: the Proponents of the Great Exposition, in general, hold that the mere collection of the mental and physical aggregates is the person; however, some of the five SaMmitIya subschools of the Great Exposition School maintain that all five aggregates are the person (although the absurdity of one person being five persons would seem difficult not to notice) while another subschool, the Avantaka, asserts that the mind alone is the person; the SUtra School Following Scripture assert that the continuum of the aggregates is the person; the SUtra School Following Reasoning maintains that the mental consciousness is the person; the Mind-Only School Following Scripture holds that the mind-basis-of-all (kun gzhi rnam par shes pa, AlayavijJAna) is the person; the Mind-Only School Following Reasoning asserts that the mental consciousness is the person; both the Yogic Autonomy School and the SUtra Autonomy School assert that a subtle, neutral mental consciousness is the person. For the most part, the delineation of what these schools assert to be the person is a matter of conjecture and not reporting of forthright statements in these schools' own texts. Though it is clear that most of these schools (if not all) accept that persons exist, it is often not clear in their own literature that they assert that something from within the bases of imputation of a person is the person. Rather, as presented in Vasubandhu's commentary on the ninth chapter of his Treasury of Manifest Knowledge, persons are merely asserted to be "non-associated compositional factors" (ldan min 'du byed, viprayuktasaMskAra) and thus an instance of the fourth aggregate, compositional factors, without a specific identification — of any of the five aggregates that are a person's bases of imputation — as the person.
གང-ཟག-གང-གིས-ཡིད-གཏད-པས-མཐོང-ཙམ-ཉིད-ནས-འདི-དང-འདི-འདྲའོ-སྙམ-པའི-བློ-ངང-གི-སྐྱེད-ནུས-པའི-ཆོས	Comment: This is the definition of same isolate type (ldog pa rigs gcig). See Perdue, 576.
གང-ཟག-གི-བདག-འཛིན-པའི-བློ	Comment: Given as an instance of superimposition (sgro 'dogs), i.e., a superimposing consciousness.
གང-ཟག-གི-བདག-མེད-རྟོགས-པའི-རྣལ-འབྱོར-གྱི-ས	Comment: One of the three yogic grounds (rnal 'byor gyi sa); see rnal 'byor gyi sa for the others.
གང-ཟག-གི-བསམ-པ-ལ-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention," but this does not accord with the following:\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.
གང-ཟག-རང-རྐྱ-ཐུབ-པའི-རྫས-ཡོད-དུ-མ-གྲུབ-པ	Comment: This is the definition of (subtle) selflessness of persons (gang zag gi bdag med) in the non-Consequentialist schools.
གང-ཟག-ཡིན-པར-གྱུར-པའི-ལྡན-མིན-འདུ-བྱེད	Comment: One of the two divisions of non-associated compositional factors (ldan min 'du byed).
གང-ཟག-མ-ཡིན-པའི-ལྡན-མིན-འདུ-བྱེད	Comment: One of the two divisions of non-associated compositional factors (ldan min 'du byed).
གང-ཟག-མ-ཡིན-པར-གྱུར-པའི-ལྡན-མིན-འདུ-བྱེད	Comment: One of the two divisions of non-associated compositional factors (ldan min 'du byed).
གང-གི-ཕྱིར	Comment: Used often as a correlative with de'i phyir.
གང-གི-ཚེ	Comment: Used often as a correlative with de'it tshe.
གང-དྲན-དྲན	Comment: Used in logical texts to indicate a state of utter absurdity in which anything would be true.
གང-ལ-གང-མེད-པ-དེ-ནི-དེས-སྟོང	Comment: Quote from Vasubandhu's MadhyAntavibhAga and so forth.
གངས-རི-སྔོན-པོར-སྣང-བའི-དབང-ཤེས	Comment: An example of a non-conceptual wrong consciousness that is a sense consciousness (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med log shes).
གཅེས-འཛིན	See: {རང་གཅེས་པར་འཛིན་པ}, apprehending yourself as dear
གཅིག	In Established Base (gzhi grub), this implies a radical identity, and is the opposite of tha dad (conceptual or technical difference); gcig and tha dad are one of the possible divisions of gzhi grub. \nExamples: pot (bum pa); pillar (ka ba) \nSee: {གཅིག་པ}
གཅིག-པ	See: {གཅིག}
གདགས-པ-བྱས	Check Sanskrit (T)
གདགས-གཞི-གཞན-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-བཏགས-པའི-བཏགས-ཡོད	one of the three types of imputed existence according to BJ; for others see: {བཏགས་ཡོད}
གདམས-ངག-པ	Comment: This is one of the two types of G#a-dam-b#as, the other being the bookish lineage (gzhung pa ba).
གདན	Need English for ex.1 (T)
གདངས	get ex from sngon 'gro text SW added Eng "light" and ex
གདོན	Check tense (T)
གདོན-མི-ཟ-བར-གྲུབ-པ	add "STTS" to abbreviations of texts at beginningSW added this entry; needs Tib sort code
གདུག	Doesn't gdugs of ex. 3 meaning umbrella or parasol?? (T)
གདུག-པ	We decided on "pernicious" as the translation of "ma rungs pa". Do we want "pernicious" for "gdug pa" also? SW added this record
གདུག-པ-ཅན	gdug pa; We decided on "pernicious" as the translation of "ma rungs pa". Do we want "pernicious" for "gdug pa" also? SW added this record
གི	Comment: One of five genitive particles—gi, kyi, gyi, 'i, yi.
གིས	Comment: One of five instrumental particles—gis, kyis, gyis, 'is, yis. Also used adverbially.
གླང	Comment: Note that rta blang means "horse and elephant," blang being an abbreviation of blang po che.
གླིང-བཞི	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are eight smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
གླིང-ཕྲན-བརྒྱད	Comment: There are eight smaller continents in Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
གླིང-ཕྲན-བརྒྱད-ཀྱི-མི	Comment: One of the two divisions of mi (humans), the other being humans of the four continents (gling bzhi'i mi).
གླིང-བཞིའི-མི	Comment: One of the two divisions of mi (humans), the other being humans of the eight small continents (gling phran brgyad kyi mi).
གློ-བུར	Comment: "Adventitious" in this context does not mean "uncaused"; it means "superficial" and is the opposite of "innermost" (phugs).
གློ-བུར-རྣམ-དག-གི-ཆ	Comment: A state of purity brought about by the path rathan than a factor of natural purity (rang bzhin rnam dag gi cha).
གནས-སྐབས	SW added Engl "context" and "situation"; changed ex 1 eng. from "by way of the level the path having been generated in one's continuum
གནས-པ-དུས-མཉམ	part of the meaning of one establishment and abiding (grub bde gcig pa'i don)
གནས-ལུགས-མཐར-ཐུག	Comment: Among the many meanings of "subsistence," here it means "existence" and not "barely existing" as in "subsistence farming."
གནས-ལུགས-ནད-གཞི	Comment: The word (gnas lugs) has the sense of "status" or "actual situation". This root is also called the (gnas lugs rtsa ba), the "definition of the body".
གནས-ལུགས-རྩ-བ	Comment: The word (gnas lugs) has the sense of "status" or "actual situation". This root is also called the (gnas lugs nad gzhi), the "actual situation [of the body] which is the basis of disease".
གནས-ངན-ལེན-གྱི-འཆིང-བ	there are two kinds: one is the obstructions of body (lus sgrib), and the other is obstructions of speech (ngag sgrib)
གནས-སྐབས-གཞན-དུ-མི-འགྱུར-བ	Comment: This is one of the three attributes of inherent nature (rang bzhin khyad par gsum): (1) its entity is not produced by causes and conditions (ngo bo rgyu rkyen gyis ma bskyed pa); (2) it does not rely upon another means of positing it ('jog byed gzhan la ma ltos pa); (3) its state does not change into something else (gnas skabs gzhan du mi 'gyur ba).
གནས-རྒྱལ-པོ	name of a park near Benaras where Buddha delivered many of his sermons
གནས-དང-བཅས-པའི-དབང-པོ-གཟུགས-ཅན-ཉེ-བར-ལེན	one of the two types of impellers (nye bar len pa) in the Mind-Only School (sems tsam, citta-mAtra); the other is impeller of predispositions (bag chags nye bar len)
གནོད	Check ex 1 eng. (T)
གནོད-འཇོམས	Comment: text attributed to Vasubandhu by some.
གནོད-པ	Comment: I use this translation-equivalent because, although by extension the term means "refute" or "contradict," I often find Sanskrit and Tibetan philosophical terminology to be far richer in its literal meaning than in its rerendering into what some English-speaking scholars have identified as its philosophical meaning. Much of the psychological punch (pun intended) is lost in such translations.
གནོད-སྦྱིན	these demons are malignant, violent, and devourerers of human flesh; yakSas are also the eight attendanats of Kuvera (or VaizravaNa), the god of wealth; those on earth bestow wealth, those in the empyrean realms houses and carriages; those in the lower heavens guard the moat and gates of the heavenly city
གཉན	Comment: see also skran. (PH) Jeffrey, the Health e-file had "gyan", but the printed book (p.204) has "gnyan". Went with printed book. Correct? *Note if changed, also change xref note in skran.
གཉེན-པོ-ལ-ལྡེམ-པོར-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention." As Bel-den-chö-jay says:\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)
གཉེར	Shouldn't the English be: seek; strive to produce (SW)
གཉི-ག	Is entry spelled correctly ? (T)
གོ	Comment: One of eleven terminating particles go, ngo, do, no, bo, mo, 'o, ro, lo, so, to, which follow their respective suffixes with to following the extra suffix da.
གོམས-པ-ཅན	don goms pa can gyi dbang mngon gyi tshad ma; Comment: There are five types of prime cognitions which induce ascertainment by themselves (rang las nges kyi tshad ma)—sense direct prime cognitions having a familiar object (don goms pa can gyi dbang mngon gyi tshad ma), sense direct prime cognitions to which the ability to perform a function appears (don byed snang can gyi dbang mngon gyi tshad ma), self-knowing direct prime cognitions (rang rig mngon gyi tshad ma), yogic direct prime cognitions (rnal 'byor mngon sum gyi tshad ma), and inferential prime cognitions (rjes su dpag pa'i tshad ma).
གོས-པ	Comment: Similar words are sgrib (obstruct, defile), bslad (pollute), zag bcas (contaminated); dri ma (taint, stain).
གྲགས-པའི-རྗེས-དཔག	inference through renown; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of inference (rjes dpag)—inference through power of the fact (dngos stobs rjes dpag), inference through renown (grags pa'i rjes dpag), and inference through belief (yid ches rjes dpag).
གྲངས-ཅན-པ	Comment: A non-Buddhist school renowned in Buddhist texts as the precursor of all Indian systems and so called due to the belief that liberation can be gained through thoroughly understanding the enumeration of twenty-five categories of objects of knowledge which principally involves distinguishing between mind and twentt-four categories of matter.
གྲངས-མེད-གཉིས-ནི-རྫོགས-པ	Comment: "Countless" in this context is said to be a number very diffuclt to reckon, specifically a one with fifty-nine zeros (NWLD).
གྲེལ-ཆུང-དོན-གསལ	Comment: A commentary on Maitreya's AbhisamayAlaMkAra (Ornament for Clear Realization), which is a commentary on the ASTasAhasrikAprajJApAramitAsUtra (Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom SUtra).
གྲོགས-བྱེད	Comment: The definition of condition (rkyen, pratyaya).
གྲོང-འཇོམས	Comment: grong sogs 'joms—destruction of cities and so forth—is one of the eighteen root infractions of the Bodhisattva vows. GrAmaghAtaka; perhaps also NagaraghAtaka, or PuraMdara.
གྲུབ-པ	Comment: See grub.
གྲུབ-མཐའ-ཀུན-ཤེས-ནས-མཐའ-བྲལ-སྒྲུབ-པ-ཞེས-བྱ-བའི-བསྟན-བཅོས-རྣམ-པར-བཤད-པ-ལེགས-བཤད-ཀྱི-རྒྱ-མཚོ	Comment: This is a commentary on his own verse root text entitled Establishment of Freedom from Extremes through Understanding All Tenets. The book contains a lively exposition of many contradictions he found in the writings of D#zong-ka-b#a. Jam-y#ang-shay-b#a wrote a lengthy rejoinder in his Great Exposition of Tenets (grub mtha' chen mo).
གྲུབ-པའི-མཐའ	grub mtha'; Comment: See grub mtha'.
གྲུབ-པ-དུས-མཉམ-གནས-པ-དུས-མཉམ-འཇིག-པ-དུས-མཉམ	Comment: The meaning (don) of one establishment and abiding (grub bde gcig).
གྲུབ-པ-དང-བདེ-བ	Comment: See grub bde gcig.
གྲུར-ཞུགས-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-ལྗོན-ཤིང-འགྲོ-བར-སྣང-བའི-དབང-ཤེས	Comment: Example of a non-conceptual facsimile bogus: check Kathy of direct perception whose cause of error abides in the basis ('khrul rgyu gnas la yod pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
གསབ	SW added this record
གསལ-ཞིང-རིག-པ	definition of consciousness (shes pa)
གསན	get ex. from Ship SW added this record
གསེར-གྱི-མངལ	Comment: also known as brahmA. Gung-tang reports that BrahmA was born from a golden lotus in the shape of an egg in the midst of a sphere of fire; the egg arose from water, the two halves of which, when they split, became the sky and the earth.
གཤེ	Tenses and English from Thumi, p. 248-9. (T)
གཤེར-བ	a quality of water
གཤིས-ལུགས	see shi lugs for synonyms (T)
གཤིས-ལུགས-སུ-གྲུབ-པ	one of the five objects of negation (dgag bya) in the SvAtantrika system; for others see: {དགག་བྱ}
གསོ-བ-རིག-པ	get ex. from Ship on Manjushrikirti. SW added the Eng. & ex.
གསོལ-བ	get tenses from Tshig; delete "ba" from Tibe entry?
གསོས	see: {གསོ}
གསུང-རབ	Comment: more literally, "high sayings." Rather than the written word, the main field of reference of this term is the spoken word.
གསུང-རབ-ལ-དྲང-ངེས-འབྱེད-པ	Comment: According to Gung-tang this means to differentiate the interpretable and the definitive with respect to the meaning of the scriptures, this requiring extensive delineation of the presentation of the two truths, which itself requires realization of emptiness. This is called "differentiating the interpretable and the definitive on the level of the meaning that is expressed within the scriptures" (brjod bya don gyi drang nges 'byed pa).
གསུང-རབ-ཀྱི-དྲང-ངེས-འབྱེད-པ	Comment: According to Gung-tang this means to identify what are interpretable and what are definitive scriptures from among the scriptures. This is called "differentiating the interpretable and the definitive on the level of the words that are the means of expression" (rjod byed tshig gi drang nges 'byed pa).
གཏམ	Check translation of example (T) ex. from Ship 62a.5
གཏམ-ངག	SW: definition seems wrong; should be the same as "gtam": speech; converstion; communication; talk; slogan; (PH) or should headword be "gtam ngan"?
གཏན-ལ-འཕེབས	There is no listing for 'phebs in Thumi. Is it a misspelling of 'bebs ? (T)
གཏན-ལ-ཕབ	ex 2 ck Eng
གཏན-ལ-ཕོབ	Check tenses (T)
གཏན-ལ-ཕེབས-པ	(T) Check tenses according to Thumi this is a different verb from phab, etc. \n(SW) I think the verb form "phebs" is a mistake; should be "phab"; (PH) "phebs" = (Das) to arrive; to depart; (Thumi) to go; to come; to move; (dbab, 'bebs, phab, phob) = (JH) to settle; to cast down; (Das) to assign; to fix; to lay down; to establish; (Thumi) to bring down; to cause to come down
གཏེར-སྟོན	SW added English.
གཏི-མུག	Compare: {མ་རིག་པ}, ignorance; rmongs pa, obscuration
གཏི-མུག-མེད-པ	amoha; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA). Non-ignorance is one of the three virtuous roots (dge ba'i rtsa ba, kuzalamUla): (1) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (2) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha)
གཏོགས	Check English of Ex. 1. Translation of ex. 2 mine. (T)
གཏོང-ལེན	Comment: This is a meditative practice for developing compassion emphasized by ShAntideva.
གཙུག-ལག-ཁང-ཆེན	one of the three Sthavira schools among the eighteen VaibhASika schools, according to VinItadeva's rendition; see Meditation on Emptiness, p.717 (T)
གཏུམ-མོ	(PH) English does not match usage in example
གུ-རུ	guru; Comment: The word guru literally means weighty or heavy, one whose continuum is weighty with the good qualities of scripture and realization (rgyud lung rtogs kyi yon tan gyis lci ba).
གུ-ཎ-ཤྲིའ	Ck to make sure it is in the right order, as the sort code is done on "na" rather than "Na" and "shrii" rather than "shii"
གུ-ཎ-མ-ཏི	Ck to make sure it is in the right order, as the sort code is done on "na" rather than "Na"
གྱི	Comment: One of five genitive particles—gi, kyi, gyi, 'i, yi.
གྱིས	Comment: One of five instrumental particles—gis, kyis, gyis, 'is, yis. Also used adverbially.
གཞལ-བྱ	for examples and synonyms see: {གཞི་གྲུབ}
གཞན-འགྱུར	Comment: Changeable mental factors are one of six main groupings of mental factors (sems byung, caitta): (1) five omnipresent (kun 'gro, sarvatraga) mental factors; (2) five determining (yul nges, viSaya-pratiniyama) mental factors; (3) eleven virtuous (dge ba, kuzala) mental factors; (4) six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUla-kleza); (5) twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyong, upakleza); and (6) four changeable (gzhan 'gyur, anyathAbhAva) mental factors.
གཞན-རིག	other-knower; an other-knower is a consciousness which engages external objects (i.e. objects other than internal consciousnesses)
གཞན-གྱིས-གནོད-པ-བྱེ-བ	Seems that either English or "bye ba" is wrong (or me) (T)
གཞན-གྱིས-དྲིང-ལ-སྨི-འཇོག-པ	Check entry: is smi correct or should it be las mi?? similar entry above—record # 223 (T)
གཞན-དུ-འགྱུར-བ	see: {གཞན་འགྱུར}
གཞན-ལུགས-དགག-པ	first of three parts of a monastic textbook (yig cha); the others being: presentation of our own system (rang lugs bzhag) and dispelling objections (rtsod pa spong)
གཞན-གྱི-དབང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད	one of the three characters in the Mind-Only (sems tsam, citta-mAtra) system; the others are: the imputational character (kun brtags kyi mtshan nyid, parikalpita-lakSaNa); and the thoroughly established character (yongs su grub pa'i mtshan nyid, pariniSpanna-lakSaNa)
གཞན-ལས-ངེས-ཀྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the two types of prime cognizer (tshad ma); the other is prime cognizer for which ascertainment is induced from itself (rang las nges kyi tshad ma)
གཞི-གྲུབ	(PH) too many divisions
གཞི-ལྡོག	one of the four types of isolates; for others see: ldog paComment: "Illustration-isolates" are conceptually isolated illustrations, that is to say, illustrations simpliciter; it is a technical term often used to refer to mere illustrations, isolated from the definition and definiendum which they illustrate.
གཞི-མཐུན-མི-སྲིད-པའི-ཆོས	definition of 'gal ba (contradictory)
གཞི-རྣམ-ཤེས	see: {ཀུན་གཞི}; {ཀུན་གཞི་རྣམ་པར་ཤེས་པ}
གཞིའི-ལྟ-བ	view of the basal state; Comment: "The view of the basal state" is in contrast to "the view in the face of knowledge" (rig ngo lta ba) — the latter being the state of meditative equipoise directly realizing emptiness.
གཞིག	Tenses? Nothing in Thumi which matches both the entry and the English (T)
གཞོམ	Thumi, p.88, has "bcom / choms" for the past and imperative (T)
གཞོམ-པ	See previous record about tenses. (T)
གཞུག-པ-ལྡེམ-དགོངས	Comment: See gzhugs pa la ldem por dgongs pa.
གཞུགས-པ-ལ-ལྡེམ-པོར-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention." As Bel-den-chö-jay says:\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)
གཞུང-པ-པ	one of the two types of Ga-dam-bas; the other is: the preceptual lineage (gdams ngag pa)
གཞུང-བརྒྱ-ལྡན	a hundred texts; Comment: DharmakIrti's work is said to contain "a hundred texts," in the sense that it is open to many interpretations.
གཟུད-པ	Tenses and English from Thumi, p. 202 (T)
གཟུགས-ཁམས	one of the three realms in Buddhist cosmology; the others are: the formless realm (gzugs med khams, arUpya-dhAtu) and the desire realm ('dod khams, kAma-dhAtu)
གཟུགས-སྐུ	one of the three bodies of a Buddha; the others are: Emanation Body (sprul pa'i sku, nirmANa-kAya); and Truth Body (chos sku, dharma-kAya)
གཟུགས-སོགས-རྟོག-པའི-ཞེན-ཡུལ-ཡིན-པ	Comment: A form's being a conceived object of a conceptual consciousness [means] that a form is taken as the object of the mode of apprehension apprehending form by way of being conceived [that is, thought about] by a conceptual consciousness.
གཟུགས-སོགས-རྟོག-པའི-ཞེན-གཞི-ཡིན-པ	Comment: A form's being a referent of a conceptual consciousness [means] that a form appears to a sense consciousness as a basis for the affixing of name and terminology from the side of its [that is, the form's] own mode of abiding, without depending on the association of conventions by terms and conceptuality, whereupon a subsequent conceptual consciousness also adheres to such an appearance and takes it to be a basis of conceiving — with regard to the form — "This is a form."
གཟུགས-སུ-རུང-བ	definition of form (gzugs, rUpa)
གཟུགས-མེད-བཞི	see: {གཟུགས་མེད་བསམ་གཏན}; {གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམས་འཇུག}
གཟུགས-མེད-ཁམས	one of the three realms in Buddhist cosmology; the others are: the form realm (gzugs khams, rUpa-dhAtu) and the desire realm ('dod khams, kAma-dhAtu)
གཟུགས-མེད-ཀྱི-སྙོམས-འཇུག	see: {གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམས་འཇུག}
གཟུགས-མེད-པའི-སྙོམས-པར-འཇུག-པ	see: {གཟུགས་མེད་ཀྱི་སྙོམས་འཇུག}; {གཟུགས་མེད་བསམ་གཏན}
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-ལྷ	form deity; Comment: This is the fourth of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-སྐུ	one of the three bodies of a Buddha; the others are: Emanation Body (sprul pa'i sku, nirmANa-kAya); and Truth Body (chos sku, dharma-kAya)
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	form sense-sphere; Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external form (phyi'i gzugs): form sense-sphere (gzugs kyi skye mched); (2) sound sense-sphere (sgra'i skye mched); (3) odor sense-sphere (dri'i skye mched); (4) taste sense-sphere (ro'i skye mched); (5) tangible object sense-sphere (reg bya'i skye mched).
གཟུགས-ཅན-གྱི-ཁམས	see: {གཟུགས་ཁམས}
གཟུགས-ཤེས-གང-རུང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-དངོས-པོ	a thing that is neither form nor consciousness; Comment: This is one of three definitions of non-associated compositional factor (ldan min 'du byed, viprayukta-saMskAra): (1) a thing that is neither matter nor consciousness (bem shes gang rung ma yin pa'i dngos po); (2) a thing that is neither form nor consciousness (gzugs shes gang rung ma yin pa'i dngos po); (3) a compounded phenomenon that is neither matter nor consciousness (gzugs shes gang rung ma yin pa'i 'dus byas).
གཟུགས-འཛིན-ཡིད-མངོན	Comment: This is one of the five types of mental direct perceptions indicated on this occasion (skabs 'dir bstan gyi yid mngon): mental direct perceptions apprehending forms, sounds, scents, tastes, and tangible objects respectively.
གཟུགས-འཛིན-དབང-མངོན	one of the five types of sense direct perceiver; for others see dbang mngon
གཟུང-བ-ཕྱི-རོལ-དོན-དུ-འཛིན-པའི-རྟོག-པ-མ-ལུས-པར-སྤངས-པའི-རང-རྒྱལ-གྱི-མཁྱེན-པ	definition of Solitary Realizer path of no more learning (rang rgyal mi slob lam)
གཟུང-འཛིན-གྲངས-མཉམ-པ	Comment: This is a school of True Aspectarians (rnam bden pa, satyAkAravAdin) within the Mind-Only School. check JYS for SUtra School
ཧ-ཅང	Ex. 1 doesn't seems to relate to the English entry? (T)
ཧཾ	Is Tibetan entry correct? (T)
ཧྭ-ཤང	the Chinese abbot spoken of by Bu-dön (bu ston) in the Chos 'byung as the opponent of KamalazIla in the debate at Lhasa
ཇི-སྐད-དུ	... zhes bshad pa: this is often translated with quotation marks. ... zhes gsungs pa: this is often translated with quotation marks
ཇི-སྙེད-པ-མཁྱེན-པའི-རྣམ-མཁྱེན	one of the two types of MahAyAna path of no more learning (theg chen gyi mi slob lam), the other being exalted knower of all aspects that knows the ultimate truth (ji lta ba mkhyen pa'i rnam mkhyen)SW: have we changed translations of 'ji snyed pa' and 'ji lta ba' from "varieties and modes" to "conventional truths and ultimate truths"?
ཇི-ལྟ-བུ	Check Sanskrit (M 5.pin)??? (T)
ཇི-ལྟ-བ-མཁྱེན-པའི-རྣམ-མཁྱེན	one of the two types of MahAyAna path of no more learning (theg chen gyi mi slob lam), the other being exalted knower of all aspects that knows conventional truths (ji snyed pa mkhyen pa'i rnam mkhyen)SW: have we changed translations of 'ji snyed pa' and 'ji lta ba' from "varieties and modes" to "conventional truths and ultimate truths"?
ཇི-སྲིད-དུ	Sanskrit??? (T)
ཇོ-བོ	get dates
ཇོ-བོ-རྗེ	get dates
ཀཱ-ལ-ཙ-ཀྲ	Comment: There are outer (phyi), inner (nang), and alternative (gzhan) KAlacakras, these being the cosmology, the structure of mind and body, and the path-structure, respectively.
ཀ-བུམ	Comment: Although pillar-and-pot exists, there is nothing that is both a pillar and a pot; hence, pillar-and-pot is an object of knowledge the being of which does not occur.
ཀ-དག	Comment: In the Great Completeness (rdzogs chen) in N#ying-ma, essential purity (ka dag) is paired with breakthrough (khregs chod; literally, "breaking through the hard") while spontaneity (lhun grub) is paired with leap-over (thod rgal) in ka dag khregs chod lhun grub thod rgal.
ཀ-བུམ-གཉིས	Comment: See ka bum.
ཀ-མ-ལ-ཤཱི-ལ	KamalazIla; Comment: The Tibetan translation of KamalazIla is padma'i ngang tshul (One Having the Nature of a Lotus).
ཀ-ནས-དག-པ	Comment: In the Great Completeness (rdzogs chen) in N#ying-ma, essential purity (ka dag) is paired with breakthrough (khregs chod; literally, "breaking through the hard") while spontaneity (lhun grub) is paired with leap-over (thod rgal) in ka dag khregs chod lhun grub thod rgal.
ཀ-བ-དང-བུམ-པ	Comment: Although pillar-and-pot exists, there is nothing that is both a pillar and a pot; hence, pillar-and-pot is an object of knowledge the being of which does not occur.
ཀའི-ཉེ-བའི-ཉོན-མོངས-པ	Comment: For divisions see nye nyon.
ཀར-ས-པ-ན	kArSapaNa; kArSapaNa coin; Comment: "Even though [pieces from a Bodhisattva's body] the size of a kArSapaNa are cut, only a discrimination of bliss is maintained." (TT, 143)
ཁ-ན-མ-ཐོ-བ	Comment: The Tibetan may literally mean "not high in the mouth" even though the term uses tho in stead of mtho.
ཁ-ཅིག-ན-རེ	Comment: Standard formula for introducing another party's opinion in debate texts.
ཁ-དོག-སྔོན-པོ	Comment: The scope of blue usually includes green.
ཁ-འཐོར-བ	Comment: One of the two divisions of animals (dud 'gro), the other being those living in the depths (bying na gnas pa).
ཁམ-གྱི-ཟས	Comment: One of the four foods, which according to (1) morsel food (kham gyi zas, kavaDaMkAra-AhAra), (2) contact food (reg pa'i zas, sparza-AhAra) which is contaminated touch that increases the great elements associated with the sense powers, (3) intention food (sems pa'i zas, manaHsaMcetanAhAra) which is intention (or attention) that involves hope for a desired object, and (4) consciousness food (rnam shes kyi zas, vijJAna-AhAra) which is the collections of consciousness. S#er-s#hül L#o-sang-pün-tsok (Notes, 13b.5) cites the third chapter of Vasubandhu's Treasury of Manifest Knowledge (III.119-128) which indicates that:\n* coarse food furthers the body that is the support of this lifetime\n* contact furthers the mind that depends on the support of the body\n* intention projects future lifetimes (in that it is the main feature of karma)\n* the karmas that actualize future lifetimes in the sense of filling in the details of the lifetime projected by intention are posited as consciousness.\nS#er-s#hül quotes Vasubandhu's explanation that morsel food exists only in the Desire Realm whereas the other three exist in all three realms—Desire, Form, and Formless—and are necessarily contaminated. As Ge-s#hay B#el-den-drak-b#a explained, the foods increase cyclic existence, and thus uncontaminated contact, intention, and consciousness are not posited as food. S#er-s#hül paraphrases AsaGga's Compendium of Ascertainments which explains that although meditative absorptions and engaging in pure behavior are means of furthering the body through eliminating unfavorable circumstances, they are not posited as foods since they do not further the body by way of their own entities. His point must be that meditative stabilization therefore should not be included in the list.\n Contrary to this, Geshe Gedün Lodrö of the University of Hamburg includes meditative stabilization (ting nge 'dzin) and gives mental food as the second (Calm Abiding and Special Insight, 70-71):\n"The four types of nourishment are (1) coarse food, (2) mental nourishment, (3) nourishment of intention, and (4) nourishment of consciousness. The sense of mental satisfaction that comes when a desire is fulfilled is called mental nourishment. Just as coarse food nourishes the body, so satisfaction nourishes or replenishes the mind upon fulfillment of a desire. The third type, nourishment of intention, is an action that projects the next lifetime. Since it generates or produces the next lifetime, it is called a nourisher, or nourishment; it is the second link of the twelve-linked dependent-arising. Similarly, the third link, which is called consciousness, is known as the food of consciousness. Just as the action that projects, or impels, a future lifetime is called a nourisher, so the consciousness which is imprinted with that action and which will at the time of the effect of that action in the future life be imprinted with other karmas is called a nourisher, or nourishment. Why is [the first link of dependent-arising,] ignorance, not called a nourisher? It is because ignorance is the agent that pervades everything; thus, it is not singled out as a nourisher. There is still another type of nourishment, that of meditative stabilization. Persons who have achieved calm abiding and special insight and have proceeded to high levels of the path do not need to use coarse food; they have the nourishment of meditative stabilization.
ཁམས	Comment: For other divisions see khams du ma and khams tha dad pa.
ཁམས-དུ-མ	manifold constituents; Comment: These six are frequently cited as the main bases of designation of a person. In the seventh chapter of the SUtra Unraveling the Thought "manifold constituents" (khams du ma) refers to the six constituents, and "various constituents" (khams sna tshogs pa) refers to the eighteen constituents. See also khams; khams tha dad pa; khams sna tshogs pa.
ཁམས-ཐ-དད-པ	Comment: See also khams; khams du ma; khams sna tshogs pa.
ཁམས-སྣ-ཚོགས-པ	various constituents; Comment: In the seventh chapter of the SUtra Unraveling the Thought "various constituents" (sna tshogs pa) refers to the eighteen constituents and "manifold constituents" (khams du ma) refers to the six constituents. See also khams; khams tha dad pa; khams du ma.
ཁམས-གོང-མ	Comment: Usually, the form and formless realms.
ཁམས-གསུམ-ས-དགུ	Comment: The Desire Realm, the Four Concentrations of the Form Realm, and the Four Formless Absorptions of the Formless Realm are the nine levels.
ཁེང-པོ	stale; Comment: In general, it is said that after twenty-four hours any food is "stale." Even in a refrigerator, the cold causes it to come into this class.
ཁོ	Comment: Generally a masculine pronoun but can also be used for the feminine or for both in the plural.
ཁོ-བོས-སྔོན-པོ-མཐོང-ངམ-མ-མཐོང-སྙམ-པའི-ཐེ-ཚོམ-འདྲེན-པར-བྱེད-པའི-སྔོན-འཛིན-དབང-པོ-མངོན-སུམ	Comment: This is an instance of a prime/valid cognition when ascertainment of even the mere appearance is induced by another (snang ba nyid kyang gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma).
ཁོམ	Comment: See mi khom pa.
ཁོང-ཁྲོ	anger; Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi). Compare zhe sdang (hatred) and khro ba (belligerence).
ཁོང-ཁྲོ-བ	pratigha; anger; Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) pratigha (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi). Compare zhe sdang (hatred) and khro ba (belligerence).
ཁོར-ཡུག	Comment: Used presently to mean "environment."
ཁྲ-བོ	Comment: Used to refer to the mottle of colors on the wings of a butterfly.
ཁྲེགས-ཆོད	Comment: In the Great Completeness (rdzogs chen) in N#ying-ma, essential purity (ka dag) is paired with breakthrough (khregs chod; literally, "breaking through the hard") while spontaneity (lhun grub) is paired with leap-over (thod rgal) in ka dag khregs chod lhun grub thod rgal.
ཁྲེལ	Comment: See khrel yod pa.It is an avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of another's disapproval and thus involves a concern for others' opinions, whereas ngo tsha (shame) is an avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of one's own disapproval (i.e., self-image) or of religious prohibition.
ཁྲེལ-མེད	Comment: See next entry.
ཁྲེལ-མེད-པ	anapatrApya; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya). Non-embarassment is a non-avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of another's disapproval and thus involves a concern for others' opinions, whereas ngo tsha med pa (lack of self-shame) is a non-avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of one's own disapproval (i.e., self-image) or of religious prohibition.
ཁྲེལ-ཡོད-པ	Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA). Embarassment (khrel yod pa) is an avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of another's disapproval and thus involves a concern for others' opinions, whereas ngo tsha (shame) is an avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of one's own disapproval (i.e., self-image) or of religious prohibition.
ཁྲེལ-དང-ལྡན	Comment: See khrel yod pa.
ཁྲིམས	Comment: Used as an abbreviation for tshul khrims (ethics).
ཁྲིམས-འཆལ	Comment: shes rab 'chal ba refers to one whose mind is disordered and runs from topic to topic. Similary, 'chal pa means a lecher.
ཁྲོ	Comment: See khro ba.
ཁྲོ-བ	krodha; upanAha; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, krodha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya). Belligerence involves wanting to fight. Compare zhe sdang (hatred) and khong khro (anger).
ཁྲོམ	Comment: To be distinguished from tshong khang (store).
ཁུ-བ	Comment: Both males and females have this essential fluid.
ཁུང	Comment: mun pa also translates tamas.
ཁྱབ-འཇུག	ViSNu; Comment: Some followers of ViSNu say that ShAkyamuni is the tenth incarnation of him.
ཁྱབ-བྱ	Comment: That which is pervaded is the definition of instance/particular (bye brag). See also khyab byed du 'jug pa'i rang gi rigs yod pa can gyi chos; khyab byed.
ཁྱབ-བྱེད	Comment: Pervader is a definition of generality (spyi).
ཁྱབ-པ	check Kathy's thesis to see if division trans is final
ཁྱབ-པ-ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག	Comment: For example, whatever is a definiendum is pervaded by not being permanent (mtshon bya yin na / rtag pa ma yin pas khyab pa).
ཁྱབ-པ-འདུ-བྱེད-ཀྱི-སྡུག-བསྔལ	Comment: One of the three types of suffering—suffering of pain (sdug bsngal gyi sdug bsngal), suffering of change ('gyur ba'i sdug bsngal); and pervasive suffering of conditioning.
ཁྱབ-པ-རྣལ-མ	Comment: See khyab pa phyin ci log (perverse pervasion). check Kathy
ཁྱབ-བྱེད-དུ-འཇུག-པའི-རང-གི-རིགས-ཡོད-པ-ཅན-གྱི-ཆོས	Comment: This is the definition of instance/particular (bye brag). See also khyab bya; khyab byed.
ཁྱབ-བྱེད-ཀྱི-རླུང	Comment: One of the five winds.
ཁྱབ-བྱེད-མ-དམིགས-པ	Comment: A type of non-observation of a related object suitable to appear which itself is a division of non-observation signs of the suitable to appear.
ཁྱད-གཞི	Comment: See khyad chos (attribute).
ཁྱད-བར-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-ཀུན-བཏགས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པ	Comment: As in "Form is produced " (gzugs skye'o); see MO, 105.
ཁྱད-པར-དག-པ-པའི-རང-བཞིན-གྱི-རྟགས-ཡང-དག	Comment: Nature signs are divided according to whether or not the terms expressing them specify an agent. If an agent is specified, it is a sign involving a qualification (or specification) of a cause; if not, it is a sign free of qualification (or specification of a cause. See khyad par ltos pa pa'i rang bzhin gyi rtags yang dag.
ཁྱད-པར-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-ཀུན-བཏགས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-བྱེ-བྲག-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པ	Comment: As in "Form is produced momentarily" (gzugs skad cig la skye'o); see MO, 105.
ཁྱད-པར-ལྟོས-པ-པའི-རང-བཞིན-གྱི-རྟགས-ཡང-དག	Comment: Nature signs are divided according to whether or not the terms expressing them specify an agent. If an agent is specified, it is a sign involving a qualification (or specification) of a cause; if not, it is a sign free of qualification (or specification of a cause). See khyad par dag pa pa'i rang bzhin gyi rtags yang dag.
ཁྱིམ-པ	householder; Comment: One of the two types of Buddhists (nang pa; lit.: insider), the other being those who have left the householder state (rab tu byung ba), i.e., monastics.
ཁྱིམ-མེད-པ	Comment: Compare rang khyim.
ཁྱོད	Comment: A subject marker in logical texts. The first example given above is the definition of ldog chos phung sum tsam po ba (isolate-phenomenon-of-the-third-type), illustrations of which are dgag pa (negative phenomenon), dngos po'i spyi (generality-of-functioning-thing), etc.
ཁྱོད-མིང-དང-བརྡས-བཞག-པ-ཙམ-ཡིན-གྱི-རང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད-ཀྱིས-མ-གྲུབ-པ	Comment: This is the reason given in the Mind-Only system for saying that imputational natures are "character-non-natures" (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, lakSaNaniHsvabhAvatA).
ཁྱོད-ཐ-སྙད-ཀྱི-དབང-གིས-བཞག-པ-མ-ཡིན-པར-རང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད-ཀྱིས-གྲུབ-པའི-དངོས-པོ	Comment: In the Mind-Only system, this is given as a reason why other-powered natures exist ultimately.
ཁྱོད-ཐ-དད-ཀྱང-ཡིན-གཞི-མཐུན-མི-སྲིད-པའི-ཆོས	Comment: This is the definition of 'gal ba (mutually exclusive phenomena).
ཁྱོད-ཆོས-དང-ཐ-དད-གང-ཞིག-དེ-ལྡོག-སྟོབས-ཀྱིས-ཁྱོད-ལྡོག-དགོས	Comment: This is the definition of 'brel ba (related phenonenon).
ཁྱོད-དེ-དང-ཐ-དད-གང-ཞིག-ཁྱོད-དེ-ལས-བྱུང-བ	Comment: This is the definition of de byung 'brel (causal relationship/ relationship of provenance).
ཁྱོད-དེ-དང-ཐ-དད-གང-ཞིག-དེ-དང-བདག-ཉིད-གཅིག-པའི-སྒོ-ནས-འབྲེལ-བ-གྲུབ-པ	Comment:This is the definition of de dang bdag gcig 'brel (related as one nature with that).
ཁྱོད-དོན-དམ-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-ཆོས-བདག-མེད-པས-རབ-ཏུ-ཕྱེ-བ	Comment: In the Mind-Only system, this is given as the reason why the thoroughly established nature is called the "ultimate-non-nature" (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).
ཁྱོད-ཀྱི-ཡིན-པ-མེད-པ	Comment: This is the definition of yin pa mi srid pa (something of which being it does not occur); in other words, it is impossible for anything to be it even though it exists. For instance, ka bum (pillar and pot) exists, but there is nothing that is both pillar and pot; even pillar and pot are not pillar and pot since they are not both. Put another way, Dick and Jane are not Dick and Jane.
ཁྱོད-ཀྱི-ཡིན-པ-མེད-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-བློའི-ཡུལ-དུ-བྱ-རུང-བ-ཡང-ཡིན-པའི-གཞི-མཐུན-པར-དམིགས-པ	Comment: This is the definition of yin pa mi srid pa'i shes bya (object of knowledge of which being it is impossible).
ཁྱོད-ཀྱི-ཡིན-པ-ཡོད-པ	Comment: This is the definition of yin pa srid pa (something of which being it occurs).
ཁྱོད-ཀྱི-ཡིན-པ-ཡོད-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-བློའི-ཡུལ-དུ-བྱ-རུང-བ-ཡང-ཡིན-པའི-གཞི-མཐུན-པར-དམིགས-པ	Comment: This is the definition of yin pa srid pa'i shes bya (object of knowledge of which being it is possible).
ཀློག	Comment: This does not mean "study" or "think over."
ཀློག-པ	Comment: This does not mean "study" or "think over."
ཀོ	Comment: This is an old term for da gdod (still again). get an example from the coomonly appearing subjects books, from Chandrakirti trans into English.
ཀུན-འགྲོ	Comment: There are five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga) that accompany all consciousnesses. See kun 'gro lnga.
ཀུན-བཏགས	Comment: This is one of three natures: (1) imputational natures (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered natures (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established natures (yongs grub, pariniSpanna). As artificial (or acquired), it is opposed to innate (lhan skyes).
ཀུན-ད	Comment: Jasmine, as an example of whiteness, is used to refer to seminal fluid.
ཀུན-གཞི	basis-of-all; Comment: Often to be distinguished from kun gzhi rnam par shes pa (mind-basis-of-all, AlayavijJAna), in which case kun gzhi refers to the seeds themselves and not the mind in which they reside.
ཀུན-རྫོབ	Comment: kun rdzob is etymologized three ways: as convention (tha snyad, vyavahAra); as mutual dependence (phan tshun brten pa, parasparasaMbhavana); and as concealer (sgrib byed, samantAdvaraNa). In the context of the two truths the third etymology is predominant in the Mind-Only and Middle Way Schools in the sense that non-ultimate phenomena seem to be truths for an ignorant consciousness that conceals reality and thus are "concealer-truths."
ཀུན-སྦྱོར	Comment: For the sake of distinction, kun dkris is translated as "entanglement."
ཀུན-བརྗོད-པའི-ཆོ-འཕྲུལ	Comment: More likely, this is the miraculous ability to speak in all languages.
ཀུན-བརྟགས-པའི-གཟུགས	imputational form; Comment: One in the triad of imputational form (kun brtags pa'i gzugs), imputed form (rnam par brtags pa'i gzugs), and form of reality (chos nyid kyi gzugs), the last meaning the reality of form in Ge-luk and noumenal form in Jo-nang. These three correspond to the three natures of a form: imputational nature, other-powered nature, and thoroughly established nature of a form.
ཀུན-དགའ-སྙིང-པོ	A#nandagarbha; Comment: Three Indian scholars are renowned especially for their works on Yoga Tantra, whom New Translation Schools consider the "Three People Expert/Proficient in Yoga [Tantra]" (yoga la mi mkhas pa gsum): Buddhaguhya (sangs rgyas gsang ba; fl. mid eighth century), ShAkyamitra (shA kya bshes gnyen), and A#nandagarbha (kun dga' snying po; fl. late ninth or early tenth century). D#zong-ka-b#a relies on A#nandagarbha for Yoga Tantra but criticizes his interpretation of the GuhyasamAja Tantra.
ཀུན-ནས-ཉོན-མོངས-པ-མེད-པའི-ཡན-ལག	Comment: See yan lag.
ཀུན-འགྲོ-ལྔ	Comment: The five omnipresent mental factors are one of six main groupings of mental factors (sems byung, caitta): (1) five omnipresent (kun 'gro, sarvatraga) mental factors; (2) five determining (yul nges, viSaya-pratiniyama) mental factors; (3) eleven virtuous (dege ba, kuzala) mental factors; (4) six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUla-kleza); (5) twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyong, upakleza); and (6) four changeable (gzhan 'gyur, anyathAbhAva) mental factors.
ཀུན-ཏུ-འགྲོ-བ	Comment: There are five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga) that accompany all consciousnesses. See kun 'gro lnga.
ཀུན-མཁྱེན-བུ-རམ-ཤིང-པ	Comment: This is an epithet of ShAkyamuni Buddha. The lineage of ShAkyamuni Buddha is traced back to a child born from an egg, which formed from semen that dripped onto a sugarcane leaf from a man wrongly accused as a killer. The child, lineage, and ShAkyamuni are known as "Sugar-Cane One" (MED, 355).
ཀུན-རྫོབ-ཀྱི-བདེན-པ	Comment: In the SUtra School Following Reasoning the following are equivalent: conventional truth (kun rdzob bden pa); permanent phenomenon (rtag pa); generally characterized phenomenon (spyi mtshan); phenomenon which is not a [functioning] thing (dngos med kyi chos); uncompounded phenomenon ('dus ma byas kyi chos); unproduced phenomenon (ma byas pa'i chos).
ཀུན-རྫོབ-ཀྱི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: An instance is an inferential cognition which realizes that sound is impermanent (sgra mi rtag rtogs kyi rjes dpag). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
ཀུན-རྫོབ-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སེམས	Comment: This term can also be loosely translated as "altruistic intention to become enlightened," but as such cannot bear the discussion about how this is a mind (sems) and not a mental factor (sems byung).
ཀུན-རྫོབ-བདེན-པ	Comment: In the SUtra School Following Reasoning the following are equivalent: conventional truth (kun rdzob bden pa); permanent phenomenon (rtag pa); generally characterized phenomenon (spyi mtshan); phenomenon which is not a [functioning] thing (dngos med kyi chos); uncompounded phenomenon ('dus ma byas kyi chos); unproduced phenomenon (ma byas pa'i chos).
ཀུན-འགྲོའི-རྒྱུ	Comment: One of the six kinds of causes; for others see rgyu.
ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-རང-བཞིན	Comment: This is one of three natures: (1) imputational natures (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered natures (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established natures (yongs grub, pariniSpanna).
ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-མཚན-ཉིད	Comment: This is one of three characters: (1) imputational characters (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered characters (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established characters (yongs grub, pariniSpanna).
ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-མ-རིག-པ	Comment: Ignorance arisen due to a faulty system of tenets, faulty scriptures, etc.
ཀུན-བཏགས-ཀྱི-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད	Comment: This is one of three natures: (1) imputational natures (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered natures (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established natures (yongs grub, pariniSpanna).
ཀུན-བཏགས-ཀྱི-མཚན-ཉིད	Comment: This is one of three characters: (1) imputational characters (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered characters (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established characters (yongs grub, pariniSpanna).
ཀུན-བཏགས-ཀྱི-རང-བཞིན	Comment: This is one of three natures: (1) imputational natures (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered natures (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established natures (yongs grub, pariniSpanna).
ཀུན-གཞི-རྣམ-ཤེས	Comment: Laya means "basis"; it is derived from the Sanskrit verbal root li, which means "providing support or basis." A# is taken as meaning "all." VijJAna means "consciousness." The verbal root jJa means "know"; na is an ending that means "way" or "means" — the means of understanding; vi means "individually" or "in detail."\n CandrakIrti takes the term as referring to that which is to be minded or known in detail, that is to say, the emptiness; see MED, p. 617.
ཀུན-གཞི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	Comment: Laya means "basis"; it is derived from the Sanskrit verbal root li, which means "providing support or basis." A# is taken as meaning "all." VijJAna means "consciousness." The verbal root jJa means "know"; na is an ending that means "way" or "means" — the means of understanding; vi means "individually" or "in detail."\n CandrakIrti takes the term as referring to that which is to be minded or known in detail, that is to say, the emptiness; see MED, p. 617.
ཀྱང	Comment: Translations like "but" would come after the clause to which it is affixed; translations like "although" would come before the clause to which it is affixed.
ཀྱི	Comment: One of five genitive particles—gi, kyi, gyi, 'i, yi.
ཀྱིས	Comment: One of five instrumental particles—gis, kyis, gyis, 'is, yis. Also used adverbially.
ལ-འུར	SW added this record
ལག-ངར	SW added this record
ལམ-བདེན	one of the four truths (bden ba bzhi, catvAri satyAni)
ལམ-གྱི-བདེན	fourth of the four noble truths (bden pa bzhi, catvAri-satyAni)
ལམ-གྱི-བདེན-པ	fourth of the four noble truths (bden pa bzhi, catvAri-satyAni)
ལམ-མཆོག-འགྲོ	Comment: This is one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ལྕ-བ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.176) identifies this as "angelica archangelica; angelica dahurica; polygonatum odoratum" Add?
ལྕམ-པ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.169) identifies this as "a type of Mallow: malva verticillata. Linn.: dalbergia lanceolaria" Add?
ལྕེ-ཤེས	one of the five divisions of sense consciousness (dnang shes); for others see: {དབང་ཤེས}
ལྕེ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-མྱོང-བྱ	definition of taste-source (ro'i skye mched)
ལྕེའི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	See: {ལྕེ་ཤེས}
ལྕེའི-དབང-པོ	one of the five divisions of internal matter (nang gi bem po); for others see: {ནང་གི་བེམ་པོ}
ལྕི-བ	Check English. There was a period bet. heavy and teacher. (T)
ལྡན-མིན-འདུ-བྱེད	Comment: Examples of this include wide categories which cannot be tied down to being just matter or just consciousness, such as thing (dngos po), specifically characterized phenomenon (rang mtshan), that which is able to perform a function (don byed nus pa).
ལྡེམ-པོར-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention." As Bel-den-chö-jay says:\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)
ལྡོག	(T) added tenses
ལྡོག-ཁྱབ	one of the three modes (tshul gsum)
ལྡོག-པ-གཅིག	one of the two types of one type (rigs gcig); the other is: one substantial type (rdzas rigs gcig)
ལྡོག-པ-ཐ-དད	refers to two things with different actual names (dngos ming)
ལྡོག-པ-རིགས-གཅིག	one of the two types of one type (rigs gcig); the other is: one substantial type (rdzas rigs gcig)
ལྡོག-ཁྱབ-རྣལ-མ	one of the four types of pervasion/entailment (khyab pa); for others see: {ཁྱབ་པ}
ལྡོག-ཁྱབ-ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག	one of the four types of pervasion/entailment (khyab pa); for others see: {ཁྱབ་པ}
ལྡོག-ཆོས-ཕུང-སུམ-ཙམ-པོ-བ	one of the first three types of isolate phenomenon (ldog chos); for others see: ldog chos; examples are: generality of pot (bum pa'i spyi); generality of permanent phenomenon (rtag pa'i spyi); generality of consciousness (shes pa'i spyi)
ལེ-ལོ	laziness; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
ལེགས-སོ	this indicates approval of a statement or action
ལེགས-པའི-བློ-གྲོས	ninth of the ten Bodhisattva grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
ལེགས-སོ-ལེགས-སོ	this indicates approval of a statement or action
ལེགས-པར-ཕྱེ-བའི-ཆོས-འཁོར	the third of the three wheels of doctrine, according to BJ; the others are: the wheel of doctrine of the four truths (bden bzhi chos 'khor); and the wheel of doctrine of non-entityness (ngo no nyid med pa'i chos 'khor)
ལེགས-པར-རྣམ-པར-ཕྱེ-བའི-ཆོས-འཁོར	that is, the third wheel of doctrine, in which Buddha taught the seventh chapter of the SaMdhinirmocana-sUtra
ལེགས-གྲུབ-ཀྱི-རྒྱུད	Comment: This is the one of the four general Action Tantras:
ལེགས-སམ-སྙམ-སྟེ	this is a way for an author to express a personal opinion
ལེན-པའི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	another name for the mind-basis-of-all (kun gzhi rnam par shes pa, Alaya-vijJAna)
ལྷ	one of the six types of ordinary beings; for others see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
ལྷ-དྲུག-གི-སྒོ-ནས-རང-ལྷར-བསྐྱེད-པ	see lha for the six deities
ལྷ-མ-ཡིན	the chief of the evil spirits, opponent of the gods, with whom (especially Indra) they wage constant war; they are defined as: "not devas", and "ugly", and "without wine"
ལྷ-མ-ཡིན-པའི-རྟེན-ཅན-གྱི-སོ-སོའི-སྐྱེ-བོ	one of the six types of ordinary beings; for others see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
ལྷ-དབང-བློ	p.n. of the author of the PramANavArttikapaJjikA
ལྷག-པའི-ལྷ	SW added this record
ལྷག-པའི-ང-རྒྱལ	exceeding pride; Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
ལྷག-པར-མོས-པ	SW added this record
ལྷན-ཅིག-བྱུང-བའི-རྒྱུ	co-arisen cause; Comment: There are six types of causes: fruitional cause (rnam smin gyi rgyu), co-arisen cause (lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu), creative cause (byed rgyu), cause of similar lot (skal mnyam gyi rgyu), omnipresent cause (kun 'gro'i rgyu), and associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu).
ལྷན-ཅིག-མི-གནས-འགལ	contradictory in the sense of not abiding together; Comment: This is one of two types of contradiction ('gal ba): mutually contradictory (phan tshun spang 'gal) such as white and non-white (dkar po dang dkar ma yin pa); and contradictory in the sense of not abiding together (lhan cig mi gnas 'gal) such as the two, antidote and object of abandonment (gnyen po dang spang bya gnyis).
ལྷན-ཅིག-དམིགས-ངེས	Comment: S#er-s#hül Ge-s#hay L#o-sang-pün-tsok says that the meaning of simultaneous observation can be taken either as simultaneous observation by valid cognition or as simultaneous production, abiding, and disintegration. It seems to me that the former is predominant.
ལྷན-སྐྱེས-ཀྱི-དྲི	one of the two types of odor; the other is: manufactured odor (sbyar byung di dri)
ལྷས-སྦྱིན	the Buddha's cousin, often portrayed as his adversary (T)
ལྷོ-འཛམ-བུ-གླིང	'dzam bu gling; Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ལྷུན-གྲུབ	Comment: In the Great Completeness (rdzogs chen) in N#ying-ma, essential purity (ka dag) is paired with breakthrough (khregs chod; literally, "breaking through the hard") while spontaneity (lhun grub) is paired with leap-over (thod rgal) in ka dag khregs chod lhun grub thod rgal.
ལི-ཡུལ	get Skrit
ལྐོག-གྱུར	Comment: A definition from Awareness and Knowledge is: a phenomenon that limited beings must realize definitively in dependence on a sign (tshur mthong rnams kyis thog mar rtags la brten nas nges par rtogs dgos pa'i chos).
ལྔ-སྡེ-བཟང-པོ	Only four names are listed? (T)
ལོ-འདབ	SW added this record
ལོ-གསར-མེ-ཏོག	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.194) identifies mon sne as "the dark read 'New Year' flower (mon chenopodium)" Add? *Note: mon sne dmar po added with same content.
ལོག	Other examples: (1) bum pa ma yin pa las log pa = opposite from not being pot(TCT); (2) chu log pa sogs kyi tha snyad sbyar ba = the verbal convention of water reverting and so forth are also used(TGP 47)
ལོག-ཤེས	one of the seven divisions of knowledge and awareness (blo rig); for others see: {བློ་རིག}
ལོག-པའི-ཤེས-པ	see: {ལོག་ཤེས}
ལོག-པའི-ང-རྒྱལ	erroneous pride; Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
ལོག-པའི-ཀུན-རྫོབ	Comment: From within objects and subjects, the translation for objects is "unreal conventionality"; for subjects it is "incorrect conventionality."
ལོག-པའི-ཀུན-རྫོབ-བདེན-པ	Comment: From within objects and subjects, the translation for objects is "unreal conventional truth"; for subjects it is "incorrect conventional truth."
ལོངས-སྐུ	one of the three main bodies of a Buddha; the others are: Form Body (gzugs sku, rUpa-kAya); and Truth Body (chos sku, dharma-kAya)
ལྟ-བ	Comment: This is often afflicted view, one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi).
ལྟ-བ-ཉོན-མོངས-ཅན	afflicted view; Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi).
ལྟ-བ-དྲང-པོར	Should entry be drang po ? (T)
ལྟེང-ཀ-དང-མཚོ-དང	How does lteng ka differ from mtsho? (T)
ལྟོ-ལྡིར-ཞབས-ཞུམ-ཆུ-སྐྱོར-གྱི-དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-པ-བུམ-པ-ཡིན-པར-མི-ཤེས-པའི-སྐྱེས-བུའི-རྒྱུད-ཀྱི-བུམ-པ-ཞེས-པའི-སྒྲ-ཙམ-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-སྐྱེས-བུའི-བུམ-འཛིན-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is an illustration of a conceptual consciousness apprehending only a sound-generality (sgra spyi kho na 'dzin pa'i rtog pa).
ལྟོ-ལྡིར-ཞབས-ཤུམ-ཆུ-སྐྱོར-གྱི-དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-པ	definition of pot (bum pa)
ལྟུང-བའི-རྩ-བ	See: {རྩ་བའི་ལྟུང་བ}
ལུང-དཔོག-པར-བྱ	Entry originally said: lungd pog ... (T)
ལུས	Comment: This is also one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ལུས-འཕགས	videha; Comment: This is one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ལུས-དབེན	physical isolation; Comment: This is the first of the six stages of the completion stage in the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tanta: physical isolation (lus dben), verbal isolation (ngag dben), mental isolation (sems dben), illusory body (sgyus lus), clear light ('od gsal), union (zung 'jug).
ལུས-སྒྲིབ	one of the two types of assumptions of bad states (gnas ngan len gyis 'ching ba, dauSTulya-bandhana); the other is: obstructions of speech (ngag sgrib, vAk-AvaraNa)
ལུས-ཤེས	one of the five sense consciousnesses; the others correspond to the other senses; see: {དབང་ཤེས}
ལུས-ཀྱི-དབང-པོ	one of the five types of sense powers; the others correspond to the other senses; see: {དབང་པོ}
ལུས-འཕགས-པོ	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ལུས-མེད-བདག-པོ	Bodiless Lord; Comment: the God of Desire ('dod lha, kAmadeva), the demonic Lord of Love (dga' rab dbang phyug). According to Gung-tang, he shot his five arrows — which cause arrogance, dullness, thorough obscuration, fainting, and mindlessness while Maheshvara was dwelling in asceticism in union with the goddess Uma, thereby causing Maheshvara to fall from his practice. Understanding that this was done by a demon, Maheshvara angered and emitted fire from his third eye of fire — the other two being sun and moon — burning away the body of the Sinful Demon (bdud sdig can, an epithet of the God of Desire), who thereby came to be called the "Bodiless Lord."
ལུས-ཤེས-ཀྱི-རེག-བྱ	Comment: This is the definition of tangible object sense-sphere (reg bya'i skye mched).
མ-པང-བུ-འཇུག	Comment: Metaphor used in the N#ying-ma Order for an accomplished yogi's experience of fundamental mind.
མ-རིག-པ	Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi).
མ-བྱས-པ	Comment: See ma byas pa'i chos.
མ-བྱས-པའི-ཆོས	Comment: Illustrations are (1) object of knowledge (shes bya); (2) the two: permanent and functioning thing (rtag dngos gnyis); (3) uncompounded space ('dus ma byas kyi nam mkha').
མ-ལུས-ཤིང-ལུས-པ-མེད-པ	get Eng and ex from Ship [STTS]
མ-ལུས-ཤིང-ལུས-པ-མེད-པར	get Eng and ex from Ship/ STTS
མ-ལུས-པར-ཁེགས-པ	change Eng. to "without remainder"? (SW)
མ-རུངས-པ	get ex from Ship
མ-དད-པ	Azraddhya; non-faith; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) Azraddhya (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
མ-ཡིན-དགག	Illustration: mountainless plain (ri med pa'i thang)\nEnglish for Divisions?? (T) too many to fit (PH)Comment: The division of negatives, or negations, into affirming and non-affirming, or implicative and non-implicative, is traced to MimAMsA injunctions to refrain from activities that either imply another activity in its place or not. For example, a "mountainless plain" is an affirming negative that explicitly suggests or indicates a positive phenomenon (a plain) in place of its object of negation (mountains). Another type of affirming negative is one that by context suggests a positive phenomenon in place of its object of negation; for instance, being told that ShAkyamuni was either a brahmin or kSatriya (member of the royal or warrior class) and was not a brahmin suggests, by context, that he was of the royal caste. A positive phenomenon — being a kSatriya — is suggested in place of the object of negation — being a brahmin — in this context. See also "non-affirming negation" (med dgag).
མ-ཡིན-དགག-དང-མེད-དགག	the two divisions of negative (dgag pa, pratiSedha)
མ-ཡིན-དགག-གི-གཞན-སེལ	Comment: One of the two types of other-eliminators (gzhan sel); the other is other-eliminator that is a non-affirming negative (med dgag gi gzhan sel).
མ-ཡིན-དགག-གི-གཞན-སེལ-ཡང-ཡིན-དོན-དམ-པར-དོན-བྱེད-ནུས-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-པའི-གཞི-མཐུན-པར-དམིགས-པ	definition of factual other-eliminator that is a specifically characterized phenomenon (don rang mtshan gyi gzhan sel)
མ-ཟིན-པའི-འབྱུང-བ-ལས-གྱུར-པའི-སྒྲ	one of the two divisions of sound-source (sgra'i skye mched, zabdAyatana); the other is: sound arisen from elements conjoined with consciousness (zin pa'i 'byung ba las gyur pa'i sgra, upatta-mahAbhUta-hetuka-zabda)
མ-ཆགས-པ	non-attachment; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA). Non-attachment is one of the three virtuous roots (dge ba'i rtsa ba, kuzalamUla) are: (1) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (2) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha).
མ-སྐྱེས-པའི-ཆོས	definition of non-produced/created phenomenon (ma byas pa'i chos)
མཎ-ཌ-ལ	Check entries transliteration (T)
མན-ཆད	see also: yan chad, ... and below
མན-ངག-གི-རྒྱུད	Comment: The third of the Four [Medical] Tantras (rgyud bzhi) is an extensive technical textbook that identifies the different types of disorders--their causation (etiology), nature (pathology), and therapy. It presents each of the major disorders individually and in great detail--discussing their causes, conditions, and symptoms as well as the methods of treatment to be used.
མང-བ	Check entry. It's not supposed to be mnga' ? (T)
མང-པོ	many; compare: {དུ་མ}, many; abundance
མང-པོས-བཀུར-བའི-སྡེ-པ	one of the eighteen VaibhASika sub-schools (T)
མང-བཀུར-བ	one of the eighteen VaibhASika sub-schools (T)
མང-སྟོན-པ	one of the eighteen VaibhASika sub-schools (T)
མར	see: {མར་ཤེས}
མཆེ-པའི-སྡེ	Comment: Also known as DaMSTrAsena, DiSTasena, DaMSTasena, DaMSTrAsena, DaMSTasyana, and so forth.
མཆེར-པ	SW added this entry. Get example from Ship? TDz 851.2 & Das 436.2
མཆིས	Check tenses (T)
མཆིས-པ	Check tenses (T)
མཆོད-པའི-ཆོ-ག	SW added "rite of offering". "Rules of offering" sounds Vedic-where is it from?
མདོ-དང-ཆོས-མངོན-འདུལ-བ	these are the three baskets (tripiTaka) of the Buddhist canon
མདོ-སྡེ-པ	one of the four main Buddhist tenet systems, according to the Ge-luk-ba school
མདོ-སྡེ-དང-འདུལ-བ-དང-ཆོས-མངོན-པ	these are the three baskets (tripiTaka) of the Buddhist canon
མདོ-སྡེ-ལས-བརྒྱ-བ	karmazataka; (SW) put Engl title of text in itals? Change "Many Kinds" to "Hundreds"?; (PH) Added Sanskrit (karmazataka) and catalog numbers (Toh. 340; P.1007)
མདོ-སྡེ-དགོངས-འགྲེལ	Comment: Title of a third-wheel sUtra considered to be definitive by the Mind-Only School.
མདོག-ཏུ-རུང-བ	definition of color (kha dog)
མཛོད	can refer to Vasubandhu's Treasury of Knowledge (abhidharma-koza)
མཛོད-སྤུ	Comment: one of the x marks/ signs of a Buddha.add comment to "smin mtshams kyi mdzod spu'i phrag"
མཛོད-སྤུས	mdzod spu; Comment: one of the x marks/ signs of a Buddhack sp. of "spus"; add comment to "smin mtshams kyi mdzod spu'i phrag"
མཛུབ-ཆུང	get ex from Dor
མེ	one of the four tangible objects which are elements ('byung bar gyur pa'i reg bya); the others are: earth (sa, pRthivI); water (chu, Ap); wind (rlung vAyu)
མེ-འབར-བའི-འོབས	Add Engl. "pit of blazing fire"? Sanskrit of "'obs" is "khadA": hut (SW)
མེད-དགག	one of the two divisions of negation (dgag pa); the other is: affirming negative (ma yin dgag, paryudAsa-pratiSedha)Comment: The division of negatives, or negations, into affirming and non-affirming, or implicative and non-implicative, is traced to MimAMsA injunctions to refrain from activities that either imply another activity in its place or not. For example, the non-existence of the horns of a rabbit is expressed by the sentence, "The horns of a rabbit do not exist," and this does not suggest anything positive in place of the horns of a rabbit. Though it can suggest another non-affirming negative such as the non-existence of the beauty of the horns of a rabbit, it does not suggest any positive phenomenon in place of its object of negation. In the same way, an emptiness is a non-affirming negative such that the term expressing it does not suggest in place of the negation of its own object of negation another, positive phenomenon. See also "affirming negation" (ma yin dgag).
མེད-དགག-གི-གཞན-སེལ	one of the two types of other-eliminator (gzhan sel); the other is other-eliminator that is an affirming negative (ma yin dgag gi gzhan sel)
མེད-པ-གཞལ-སྣང-ཅན-བཟུང-ཡུལ-དུ-བྱེད-པའི-རྟོག-མེད-འཁྲུལ-ཤེས	one of the three divisions of knowledge and awareness (blo rig) according to the three-fold division
མི-རྟག	see: {མི་རྟག་པའི་ཆོས}
མི-ཟད	Example had "ma zad" (T)
མི-ཕམ-བཤེས-གཉེན	p.n. of the author of the Commentary on the Precious Garland (ratnAvalI-TIkA, rin po che'i phreng ba'i rgya cher bshad pa), P. 5659, vol. 129
མི-འདྲ-བ	Comment: (GD:119) One of DharmakIrti's four criteria for specifically characterized phenomena. The others are: (1) having the power to produce effects (don byed nus pa), (3) not directly denotable by language (sgra'i yul ma yin), (4) apprehensible without reliance on other factors (rgyu mtshan ?????????)
མི-འཇིགས-པ-སྦྱིན-པ	ck Skrit
མི-སློབ-ལམ	path of no more learning; Comment: This is one of the five paths (lam): path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
མི-རྟག-པ	for synonyms and examples see: {བྱས་པ}
མི-དགེ-བ	example: srog gcod pa, killing
མི-མཐུན-ཕྱོགས	see: {མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས}; {མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཉེན་པོ}
མི-མཐུན-པའི-ཕྱོགས	see: {མི་མཐུན་པའི་ཕྱོགས་ཀྱི་གཉེན་པོ}
མི-མཐུན-པའི-ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-གཉེན-པོ	These are: (1) the antidotes of the basis (AdhAra-pratipakSa); (2) the antidotes of removal (dUrIbhAva-pratipakSa); (3) the antidote of abandonment (prahANa-pratipakSa); and the antidote of unbelief (vidhUSaNA-pratipakSa)
མི-མཐུན-པའི-ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-གཉེན-པོ-ཡིན-པ	see previous entry
མི-འཇིག-པ	definition of uncaused phenomenon ('dus ma byas kyi chos)
མི-འཇིག-པའི-ཆོས	definition of uncaused phenomenon ('dus ma byas pa'i chos)
མི-གཡོ-བ	name for the eighth of the ten Bodhisattva grounds (sa, bhUmi); for others see: byang sems 'phags pa'i sa. Acala is a wrathful deity closely associated with Performance Tantra and the VairocanAbhisambodhi Tantra.
མིའི-རྟེན-ཅན-གྱི-སོ-སོའི-སྐྱེ-བོ	one of the six divisions of ordinary beings (so so'i skye bo, pRthagjana); for others see: {སེཨེ་དམྱལ་བའི་རྟེན་ཅན་གྱི་སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
མིག-དབང	see: {མིག་གི་དབང་པོ}
མིག-ཤེས	one of the five divisions of sense consciousness (dbang shes); the others are: ear consciousness (rna shes); nose consciousness (sna shes); tongue consciousness (lce shes); body consciousness (lus shes)
མིག-གི-དབང-པོ	one of the five divisions of internal matter (nang gi bem po); the others are: ear sense power (rna ba'i dbang po); nose sense power (sna'i dbang po); tongue sense power (lce'i dbang po); body sense power (lus kyi dbang po)
མིག-གི-རྣམ-ཤེས	Check divisions (T)
མིག-གི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	see: mig shes\nNot sure what divisions mean?? (T)
མིག-ཤེས-ཀྱི-བཟུང-བྱ	definition of form-source (gzugs kyi skye mched, rUpAyatana)
མིང-བརྡའ	Comment: Jam-y#ang-shay-b#a holds that "name" (ming) in this the Mind-Only context means a term expressing that object (rang zhes rjod pa'i sgra), and although "terminology" (brda') usually has the same meaning as "name," in order to avoid redundancy he takes it to mean a conceptual consciousness apprehending that object (rang 'dzin rtog pa). (This explanation of "terminology" is well-founded in the tradition since a common dictum is that names and conceptual consciousnesses engage their objects similarly.) (PH) verify change in note
མིང-གཟུགས	the fourth of the twelve links of dependent arising
མིང-དང-གཟུགས	the fourth of the twelve links of dependent arising
མཁན-པོ	Comment: This word often means "abbot," but it also refers to someone versed in a topic.
མཁས	Comment: smra mkhas = vAk-karaNa(MSA).
མཁྲིས	Comment: In the Tibetan medical system, one of the three primary elements promoting health, when balanced, and disease, when imbalanced--the other two being wind (rlung) and phlegm (bad kan). The three are called the three problematics (nyes pa, doza), often mistranslated as "humours," which are necessarily fluids whereas wind is not a fluid.
མཁྲིས-པ	bile; Comment: One of the three problematics (nyes pa; doza), often translated as "humours," but the "humours" are fluids as in the four elemental fluids of the body--blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. In Buddhist medicine the three problematics, which, when in balance, promote health and, when imbalanced, promote disease, are wind (rlung), bile (mkhris pa), and phlegm (pad kan).
མཁྱེན-པ	wisdom; Comment: Equivalents taken from Grounds and Paths (sa lam) are path of liberation (that lam), exalted wisdom (ye shes), clear realizer (mngon rtogs), mother (yum), vehicle (theg pa).
མཁྱུད	Comment: dpe mkhyud means to hold onto books and thus an unwillingness to lend books; this is how it comes to mean miserliness with respect to the doctrine.
མནར-མེད	Comment: Name of the worst hell.
མངའ-ཐང	get: dbang thang, mnga' thang, lung rta, la g.yog, etc.; add to other entries SW added this record
མངོན-མཐོ	Comment: The term mngon mtho (abhyudaya) refers to elevated (ud) states, i.e., the happinesses, of humans and gods relative to animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings within the five types of lives in cyclic existence.
མངོན-སྤྱོད	mngon spyod seems to be tantric activities of the slaying/liberation type which came under attack in Tibet periodically; can we indicate this somehow? Tshig mdzod 690.1 fierce activities—activities which slay/ liberate enemies, spirits, and obstructors through the power of mantra drag po'i las te sngags mthus dgra bo dang gdon bgegs rnams bsgral ba'i las (SW)
མངོན-སུམ	one of the seven types of knowledge and awareness (blo rig); for others, see blo rig
མངོན-པའི-ང-རྒྱལ	Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
མངོན-པར-རྟོགས-པ	clear realization; Comment: See mngon par rtogs pa'i rgyan. In the context of AsaGga's Compendium of Ascertainments (Tokyo sde dge, sems tsam, vol. 8 (zhi), 279b.1), Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso (Port of Entry, 410.3) identifies these as the six — contemplation, faith, ethics, true knowledge of clear realization, true knowledge arisen from the finality of clear realization, and final clear realization — and thus as the path.
མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པར-གྱུར-པས	Check entry? (T)
མངོན-པར-མཐོ-བ	abhyudaya; Comment: The term mngon par mtho ba (abhyudaya) refers to elevated (ud) states, i.e., the happinesses, of humans and gods relative to animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings within the five types of lives in cyclic existence.
མངོན-དུ-བསྙེན-པ-བྱེད-པ	Comment: The word bsnyen pa is taken as meaning nye ba, coming close or approaching (the state of a deity).
མངོན-བརྗོད-ཀྱི-བག-ཆགས	abhilApavAsanA; predispositions of verbalization; Comment: There are four types of predispositions in Ge-luk-b#a explanations of Mind-Only (sems tsam): predispositions of [perceptions of] similar type (rigs mthun gyi bag chags); abhilApavAsanA (mngon brjod kyi bag chags, abhilApavAsanA); predispositions of the view of self (bdag lta'i bag chags, AtmadRøtivAsanA); predispositions of the branches of cyclic existence (srid pa'i yan lag gi bag chags, bhavAGgavAsanA.
མངོན-སུམ-དུ-མ-མཛད-པ	Check entry (T) SW changed "mdzed" to "mdzad".
མངོན-སུམ-དུ-མཛད-པ	SW added this entry.
མངོན-སུམ-འཁྲུལ-རྒྱུ-ཅན	Comment: An illustration is a sense direct perception apprehending the color of a mirage which directly generates a superimposition apprehending the mirage as water (smig rgyu la chur 'dzin pa'i sgro 'dogs dngos su skyed par byed pa'i smig rgyu'i kha dog'dzin pa'i dbang mngon).
མངོན-སུམ-ལ-སྣང-བ-གང-ཞིག-སོ-སོར-མི-སྣང-བ	definition of one substantial entity (rdzas gcig)
མངོན-སུམ-གྱིས-དྲངས-པའི-རྟོག-པ-བཅད-ཤེས	one of the two types of conceptual subsequent cognizer (rtog pa bcad shes), the other being non-conceptual; see rtog pa bcad shes\nCheck English (T)
མངོན-སུམ-དང-པོ-པ	one of the three types [according to one division] of direct perceiver arisen from another (gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma)
མངོན-སུམ-རྟོགས-མེད	(PH) The entry in (GD:482) is actually mistaken. The passage says "...rtogs pa can" but should read "...rtogs med"
མངོན-སུམ-གིས-དྲངས-པའི-རྟོག-པ-བཅད-ཤེས	Comment: This is one of the two types of conceptual subsequent cognition (rtog pa bcad shes): conceptual subsequent cognition induced by direct perception (mngon sum gis drangs pa'i rtog pa bcad shes), an illustration of which is fix; and conceptual subsequent cognition induced by inference, an illustration of which is the second moment of an inference realizing that sound is impermanent (sgra mi rtag rtogs kyi rjes dpag skad cig gnyis pa).
མངོན-སུམ-བཅད-ཤེས	direct subsequent cognizer; one of the two types of subsequent cognizer (bcad shes), the other being conceptual direct subsequent cognizer (rtog pa bcad shes)
མངོན-སུམ-གྱི-སྣང-ཡུལ	For synonyms and examples see: {དངོས་པོ}
མངོན-སུམ-གྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the two types of direct perceiver (tshad ma), the other being inferential direct perceiver (rjes su dpag pa'i tshad ma)
མངོན-སུམ-གྱི-ཚད-མས-དངོས-སུ-རྟོགས-པར-བྱ-བ	Comment: definition of manifest phenomenon (mngon gyur) in Established Base (gzhi grub)\nCheck English (T) Is object of cognition the English of "rtogs par bya ba"? (SW)
མངོན-འདོད-ཀྱི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: An instance of this is a conceptual consciousness wishing for a future object at the present time (de ring gi dus su ma 'ongs pa'i don mngon par 'dod pa'i rtog pa). This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
མཉམ-བཞག-སྣང-བཅས	Comment: This comes from systems that hold that even during direction perception of emptiness the phenomena qualified by emptiness still appear.
མཉམ-བཞག-སྣང-མེད	Comment: This comes from systems that hold that the objects qualified by emptiness do not appear during meditative equipoise. (PH) I added the English contextually from the previous entry.
མཉམ-པ-ཉིད-ལ-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention," but this does not accord with the following:\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.
མཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-སྒོམ-ལམ-ཆུང-ངུའི-ཆུང-ངུ-ནས-ཆེན-པོའི-ཆེན-པོའི-ཆེན-པོའི-བར-དགུ	See: {ཉན་ཐོས་ཀྱི་སྒོམ་ལམ་བར་ཆད་མེད་ལམ}
མོ-མོག	a type of dumplings with meat inside\nIs this spelt "mog mog" ? (T)
མོན-སྣེ-དམར-པོ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.194) identifies mon sne as "the dark read 'New Year' flower (mon chenopodium)" Add? *Note: lo gsar me tog added with same content.
མོས	see: {མོས་པ}
མོས-པ	one of the five determining mental factors (yul nges lnga, paJca viSaya-pratiniyama); for others see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
མོས-སྤྱོད	see: {མོས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས}
མོས-པའི-སྤྱོད-པའི-ས	see: {མོས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས}
མོས-པ-ཡིད-བྱེད	third of the preparations (nyer bsdogs) for the first concentration (bsam gtan), the "not unable" (mi lcogs med)
མོས-པ-ཡིད-ལ-བྱེད-པ	third of the preparations (nyer bsdogs) for the first concentration (bsam gtan), the "not unable" (mi lcogs med)
མོས-སྤྱོད-ཀྱི-སས-བསྡུས-པའི-བྱང-སེམས-ཀྱི-མཁྱེན-པ	Comment: This is the definition of the path of a Bodhisattva who is an ordinary being (byang sems so skye'i lam).
མོས-སྤྱོད-པའི-ས	includes the first two paths, the path of accumulation (tshogs lam, saMbhAra-mArga) and the path of preparation (sbyor lam, prayoga-mArga)
མོས-པས-སྤྱོད-པ-ལ-གནས-པའི-བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའ	see: {མོས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས}
མོས-པས-སྤྱོད-པའི-ས	see: {མོས་སྤྱོད་པའི་ས}
མཐའ-དཔྱད	What about "mtha' dpyod"—is it a synonym? is this entry a mistake, or should there be a separate entry?
མཐའ-གཅིག-ཏུ-ཞེན-པ	one of the six types of mental engagement (yid dpyod); for others see: {ཡིད་དཔྱོད}
མཐར-ཐུག	SW added Eng "complete"
མཐར-ཐུག-པ	SW added Eng "complete"
མཐར-ཐུག-གི-སེམས-ཙམ	Comment: A syncretic system propounded by Dol-b#o-b#a S#hay-rap-gyel-tsen. Synonyms include Ultimate Mind-Only (don dam pa'i sems tsam), Great Middle Way (dbu ma chen po), and Supramundane Mind-Only ('jig rten las 'das pa'i sems tsam).
མཐོ-གླིང	Comment: location where Atisha wrote the Lamp for the Path to Enlightenment in 1042-1043.
མཐོན-པོ	Example originally said ... mthong por ... (T)
མཐོང-ལམ	path of seeing; Comment: This is one of the five paths (lam): path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
མཐོང-བའི-ལམ	See: {མཐོང་ལམ}
མཐོང-ལམ-བར-ཆད-མེད-ལམ-སྐད-ཅིག-གཉིས-པ	example of subsequent cognizer of a yogic direct perceiver (rnal 'byor mngon sum bcad shes)
མཐོང-མ-མ-ལགས-པ	N.B.: mthong ma = mthong ba (T) entry said mthong ma (= ba)
མཚམས-མེད-ལྔ	Comment: Same as (las kyi mtha' ma lnga). (PH) I added the Tibetan from Gön-chok-jik-may-w#ang-b#o
མཚན	see: {མཚན་མ}
མཚན-ཉིད	(PH) too many synonymsComment: A "definition" in this the Mind-Only system is not a verbal description; it is the actual object, viewed in one way as being the meaning (don, artha) whereas the definiendum is the name (ming, nAma). In another way, the definition is viewed as a "defining property" that characterizes an object. (PH) added M-O to note. Check. Exclusive view of M-O?
མཚན-ཉིད-ལ-ལྡེམ-པོར-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention." As Bel-den-chö-jay says:\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)
མཚན-ཉིད-སོ-སོར-རིག-པ-ཡིད-བྱེད	second of the seven preparations (nyer bsdogs bdun) for the first concentration, the "not unable" (mi lcogs med); for others see: {ཉེར་བསྡོགས}
མཚན-ཉིད-སོ-སོར-ཡིད-བྱེད	second of the seven preparations (nyer bsdogs bdun) for the first concentration, the "not unable" (mi lcogs med); for others see: {ཉེར་བསྡོགས}
མཚན-ཉིད-ངོ-བ-ཉིད-མེད-པ	character-non-nature; Comment: The three non-natures are character-non-nature (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); production-non-nature (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); ultimate-non-nature (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).
མཚན-ཉིད-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ	Comment: This is one of the three non-natures: character-non-nature (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); production-non-nature (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); ultimate-non-nature (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).
མཚན-ཉིད-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ-ཉིད	Comment: See mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa.
མཚན-ཉིད-ཡོངས-སུ-ཆད-པའི-ཀུན-བརྟགས	one of the two types of imputations; according to BJ; the other is: enumerated imputations (rnam grangs pa'i kun brtags)
མཚན-དང-དཔེ-བྱད	major and minor marks; SW changed the Eng. from "major and minor marks"
མཚན-དང-དཔེ-བྱད-བཟང-པོ	major and minor marks; SW changed the Eng. from "major and minor marks"
མཚན-མའི-ལྷ	sign deity; Comment: This is the sixth of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
མཚན-མ-མེད-པ	Comment: An equivalent of ultimate truth (don dam bden pa, paramArthasatya) so called because in it the signs of the proliferations of duality are ceased.
མཚན-གསོལ-བ	get ex. Ship 64a.4 SW added this record (Tshig 2310.1)
མཚུངས-ལྡན	Comment: See also mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu.
མཚུངས-ལྡན-གྱི-རྒྱུ	associational cause; Comment: There are six types of causes: fruitional cause (rnam smin gyi rgyu), co-arisen cause (lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu), creative cause (byed rgyu), cause of similar lot (skal mnyam gyi rgyu), omnipresent cause (kun 'gro'i rgyu), and associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu). There are five types of association: (1) object of observation (dmigs pa); (2) aspect (rnam pa); (3) basis (rten); (4) time (dus); (5) substantial entity (rdzas).
མུན-པ	tamas; Comment: In SAmkhya this is one of the three material qualities (yon tan gsum, triguNa): lightness (snying stobs, sattva), 2) motility (rdul, rajas), 3) darkness (mun pa, tamas). Dzong-ka-ba's Great Exposition of Secret Mantra a passage cites a passage calling the three subtler consciousnesses preceding the mind of clear light according to the GuhyasamAja system sattva, rajas, and tamas.
མྱ-ངན-འདས	see: {མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ}
མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདས-པ-ཞི-ཞིང-དགེ-བ	one of the four seals (phyag rgya bzhi); for others see: {ཕྱག་རྒྱ}
མྱ-ངན-འདའ-བ	see: {མྱ་ངན་ལས་འདས་པ}
མྱང	Thumi, p.192, has myang for past, but it is probably a typo (T)
མྱོང-བ-རྒྱུ-མཐུན-གྱི-འབྲས-བུ	Comment: This is one of the two types of causally concordant effect (rgyu mthun kyi 'bras bu): functionally causally concordant effect (byed pa rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu) and experientially causually concordant effect (myong ba rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu).
ནཡ-གྲོ-དྷ-ལྟར	ck entry & Sanskrit
ནཡ-གྲོ-དྷ-ལྟར-ཆུ-ཞེང-གབ-པ	ck entry & Sanskrit
ན-རེ	(PH) Wilson (p.671) gives "na re" as a syntactic particle that "marks a subject which is the source of an opinion or a statement"
ནམ	nam is also used as a question particle; see example 3
ནམ-མཁའི-ལྡིང	GaruDa; the GaruDa is a golden winged bird who is the vehicle of ViSNu and the lord of the winged race
ནམ-མཁའི-ཁམས-དེ-དང	Check entry (+de dang) ?? (T)
ནང-གི-གཟུགས	internal form; Comment: This is one of the two divisions of form (gzugs, rUpa): internal form (nang gi gzugs) and external form (phyi'i gzugs).
ནང-གི-བེམ-པོ	Comment: This is one of the two divisions of matter (bem po, kanthA); the other is external matter (phyi'i bem po).
ནང-གི-འབྱོར-བ-ལྔ	Comment: Same as (rang 'byor lnga). (PH) I added the Tibetan from Gön-chok-jik-may-w#ang-b#o
ནང-ནུབ-ནང-ནུབ-ཅིང-རིམ-གྲོ-བྱ-བའི-དོན-དུ-འདོང-བར-བྱེད	Is nang nub supposed to be repeated in Entry?? (T)
ནེ-ལ	Comment: a big black bird that sweeps down on rabbits or small sheep and carries them away
ང-རྒྱལ	mAna; Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi). NAgArjuna mentions seven prides in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
ང-རྒྱལ-ལས-ཀྱང-ང-རྒྱལ	pride beyond pride; Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
ངའོ-སྙམ-པའི-ང-རྒྱལ	Comment: This is one of seven prides which NAgArjuna mentions in his Precious Garland, stanzas 407-412: pride of selfhood (bdag nyid nga rgyal), exceeding pride (lhag pa'i nga rgyal), pride beyond pride (nga rgyal las kyang nga rgyal), pride of thinking I (nga'o snyam pa'i nga rgyal), pride of conceit (mngon pa'i nga rgyal), erroneous pride (log pa'i nga rgyal), pride of inferiority (dman pa'i nga rgyal).
ངག-དབེན	Comment: This is the second of the six stages of the completion stage in the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tanta: physical isolation (lus dben), verbal isolation (ngag dben), mental isolation (sems dben), illusory body (sgyus lus), clear light ('od gsal), union (zung 'jug).
ངག-དབང-དཔལ-ལྡན	Comment: He is a Kalkha Mongolian Ge-luk-b#a who studied at both Go-mang and L#o-s#el-l#ing; author of Explanation of the Meaning of the Conventional and the Ultimate in the Four Tenet Systems (grub mtha' bzhi'i lugs kyi kun rdzob dang don dam pa'i don rnam par bshad pa) (New Delhi: Lama Guru Deva, 1972) and so forth
ངན-སོང-གསུམ	Comment: The three are hell-being (dmyal ba), hungry ghost (yi dwags), and animal (dud 'gro).
ངེས-དོན	Comment: Compare drang don.
ངེས-ཚིག	Comment: This type of etymology is usually done by creatively adding (bsnan), changing (phyis), and/or deleting (phyis) letters, whereas such is usually not done in a stricter etymology (sgra bshad).
ངེས-འབྱེད-ཆ-མཐུན	Comment: This is equivalent to path of preparation (sbyor lam, prayogamArga).
ངེས-པའི-དོན	Comment: Compare drang don.
ངེས-པའི-ཚིག	Comment: This type of etymology is usually done by creatively adding (bsnan), changing (phyis), and/or deleting (phyis) letters, whereas such is usually not done in a stricter etymology (sgra bshad).
ངོ-ཚ	Comment: See ngo tsha shes pa.
ངོ-ཚ-བ	ngo tsha; Comment: See ngo tsha shes pa.
ངོ-ཚ-ཤེས-པ	hrI; shame; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) hrI (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA). Embarassment (khrel yod pa) is an avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of another's disapproval and thus involves a concern for others' opinions, whereas ngo tsha (hrI) is an avoidance of faults from the viewpoint of one's own disapproval (i.e., self-image) or of religious prohibition.
ངོ-ཚ-མེད-པ	AhrIkya; non-shame; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) AhrIkya (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
ངོ-བོ-གཅིག	Comment: See ngo bo gcig pa.
ངོ-བོ-གཅིག-པ	same entity; Comment: This is one of the three types of sameness (gcig pa): same entity (ngo bo gcig pa); same self-isolate (rang ldog gcig pa); same type (rigs gcig pa).
ངོ-བོ-རྒྱུ-རྐྱེན-གྱིས-མ-བསྐྱེད-པ	Comment: This is one of the three attributes of inherent nature (rang bzhin khyad par gsum): (1) its entity is not produced by causes and conditions (ngo bo rgyu rkyen gyis ma bskyed pa); (2) it does not rely upon another means of positing it ('jog byed gzhan la ma ltos pa); (3) its state does not change into something else (gnas skabs gzhan du mi 'gyur ba).
ངོ-བོ-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-ཀུན-བཏགས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-བྱེ-བྲག-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པ	Comment: An instance is "This is a contaminated form" ('di ni zag bcas kyi gzugs so); see MO, 105.
ངོ-བོ-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པའི-ཀུན-བཏགས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-ལ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པ	Comment: An instance is "This is a form" ('di ni gzugs so); see MO, 105.
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-གསུམ	three natures; Comment: The three natures are imputational natures (kun btags, parikalpita), other-powered natures (gzhan dbang, paratantra), and thoroughly established natures (yongs grub, pariniSpanna).
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ	niHsvabhAva; Comment: Another possible translation equivalent for "non-nature" (ngo bo nyid med pa; niHsvabhAva) is "non-entityness." Despite being admittedly awkward, it closely reflects in both its etymology and its meaning the Sanskrit term niHsvabhAva which is derived from the verbal root bhU "to be." For, "entity" is derived in its basic form (es) from the Latin esse "to be" and is derived in its suffixed form from the Sanskrit as which, like bhU, means "being." In addition, "entity" means "something that exists as a particular and discrete unit" or "the fact of existence; being." Thus, "non-entityness" would be a suitable translation for the negative term niHsvabhAva, if it were not so awkward; other possible translations are "non-thingness," "non-natureness," and "unreality." Since all of these choices are awkward and since trisvabhAva is translated as "three natures," I have chosen "non-nature" for niHsvabhAva; it has the additional virtue of reflecting the play between svabhAva and niHsvabhAva — (three) natures and (three) non-natures.
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པར-སྨྲ-བ	Comment: These are the so-called Proponents of the Middle (dbu ma pa, mAdhyamika), but the Proponents of Mind-Only consider themselves to be the Proponents of the Middle since they propound a middle free from the two extremes, and thus this school is often referred to with a name acceptable to all schools, "Proponents of Non-Nature."
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ-གསུམ	Comment: The three non-natures are character-non-nature (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); production-non-nature (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); ultimate-non-nature (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).
ངོ-བོ-དང-ཁྱད-བར-དུ-ཀུན-བཏགས-པས-སྟོང-པའི-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	emptiness of factors imputed in the manner of entity and attribute; Comment: This is one of two subtle emptinesses are set forth in Mind-Only literature. "The emptiness of factors imputed in the manner of entity and attribute" is described as an object's absence of being established by way of its own character as a referent of a term verbalizing it or of a conceptual consciousness apprehending it (rang zhes rjod pa'i sgra jug pa'i jug gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis ma grub pa; rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis ma grub pa). These refer to, for instance, a table's not being established by way of its own mode of subsistence (rang gi gnas tshod kyi dbang gis ma grub pa) as the basis or referent (1) of the spoken terminology "table" and (2) of thoughts of table. Although a table is indeed the referent of the thought, "This is a table," or of the spoken word, "This is a table," it is not so established by way of its own character or by way of its own mode of subsistence. The absence of this status is called the "emptiness of a factor imputed in the manner of an entity." Similarly, although the table is indeed the referent of the thought, "This table is beautiful," or of the spoken word, "This table is beautiful," it is not so established by way of its own character or by way of its own mode of subsistence. The absence of this status is called the "the emptiness of a factor imputed in the manner of an attribute." Since factors imputed in the manner of entity and attribute do indeed exist, it is their being established by way of their own character that is refuted. The general term "empty of imputed factors" (kun btags kyis stong pa, parikalpitazUnya) without the qualification "in the manner of entity and attribute" can be used more widely to include the emptiness of any type of fictional imputation, including that of externality. See also "emptiness of external objects" (phyi rol don gyis stong pa).
ནི-གུ-མ	Indian female tantric siddhA, "sister" of Naropa who married him, helped him to renounce the world and herself became a tenth ground bodhisattva and is now a Buddha; founded and now protects the Shang-b#a (zhang pa) lineage of G#a-gyü-b#a (bka' brgyud pa); taught Kyung-b#o-nen-jor (khyung po rnal 'byor) as a sky-goer (mkha' 'gro ma, dAkiNI) at a cemetery at SoSa; gave him six yogas, which served as the foundation of the school
ནོས	get tenses. SW added this entry; (PH): (Thumi) (nod, nod, nos, nos) to receive; to obtain; to obtain or accept religious obligations
ནུབ-བ-ལང-སྤྱོད	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ཉ	Check example; it had na ldan ba'i tsul du?? (T)
ཉ-ཊིཀ	Needs entry number
ཉ-ཊཱི-ཀཱ	SW added this entry. (PH) author? Nya Lo-tsa-wa?
ཉལ	check tenses (T)
ཉམ-ང-བ-མེད-པ	Check entry, why the first one without sgra? (T)
ཉམས-ལེན	or for tenses: "nyams su len pa"?
ཉམས-ལོངས	The only verb that has this form is langs / lang / lang / longs (to get up); Thumi, p.244 (T)
ཉམས-སྣང	Check note in English with Sa-lam text. Isn't this word used with regard to how dreams function on the Bodhisattva grounds (check towards end of text) (T)
ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	Check entry. I don't understand what the dash means here. (T)
ཉམས-དགའ-བ	add VS=Vajrazekhara P113/ T get Peking vol. 5 to list of works cited/ from which examples are drawn
ཉམས-སུ-ལོངས	See comment under nyams longs (T)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ངེས-འབྱེད-ཆ-མཐུན	Check synonyms! (T)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-སྦྱོར-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Hearers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མཐོན-ལམ-བར-ཆད-མེད-ལམ-དང-རྣམ-གྲོལ-ལམ-གང-རུང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མཐོང-ལམ-ཡང-ཡིན-རང-འདྲེན-བྱེད-ཀྱི-རྣམ-གྲོལ-ལམ-རྫོགས-རྗེས-སུ-བྱུང-བའི-ཆ-ནས-བཞག-པའི-ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-བདེན-པ-མངོན-རྟོགས	Comment: This is the definition of a Hearer's exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment (nyan thos kyi mthong lam rjes thob ye shes).
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ཚོགས-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Hearers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ལམ-གྱི-བགྲོད-པ-མཐར-ཕྱིན-པའི-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of Hearer path of no more learning (nyan thos kyi mi slob lam)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-དད-པའི-ས	Check synonyms (T)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ཆོས-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of Hearer's path of accumulation\nCheck synonyms! (T)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མི-སློབ-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Hearers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ཐར-པ-ཆ-མཐུན	Check synonyms! (T)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མཐོང-ལམ-བར-ཆད-མེད-ལམ	one of the three types of exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a Hearer's path of seeing; see nyan thos kyi mthong lam mnyam bzhag ye shes for others
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མཐོང-ལམ-རྗེས-ཐོབ-ཡེ-ཤེས	one of the three types of Hearer path of meditation; see nyan thos kyi mthong lam for others
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མཐོང-ལམ-མཉམ-བཞག-ཡེ-ཤེས	one of the three types of Hearer path of meditation; see nyan thos kyi mthong lam for others
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ཐེག-པ-ལ-ཡང-དག-པར-ཞུགས-པ	Comment: Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso explains that "vehicle" here means the scriptural collections of the Hearers, these being the Hearer vehicle as verbalizing words (rjod byed tshig gi theg pa).
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-ལ-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of Hearer path of meditation (nyan thos kyi sgom lam)\nCheck synonyms! (T)
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-སྒོམ-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Hearers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-སྒོམ-ལམ-བར-ཆད-མེད-ལམ	one of the three types of exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a Hearer path of meditation; see nyan thos kyi sgom lam mnyam bzhag ye shes for others
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-རྣལ-འབྱོར-མངོན-སུམ	one of the three types of yogic direct perceiver; the others are: Solitary Realizer's yogic direct perceiver (rang rgyal gyi rnal 'byor mngon sum) and MahAyAna yogic direct perceiver (theg chen gyi rnal 'byor mngon sum)
ཉེ-ཉོན	secondary afflictions; Comment: Secondary afflictions are one of six main groupings of mental factors (sems byung, caitta): (1) five omnipresent (kun 'gro, sarvatraga) mental factors; (2) five determining (yul nges, viSaya-pratiniyama) mental factors; (3) eleven virtuous (dge ba, kuzala) mental factors; (4) six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUla-kleza); (5) twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyong, upakleza); and (6) four changeable (gzhan 'gyur, anyathAbhAva) mental factors. The twenty secondary afflictions are: (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
ཉེ-བར-སྟོན-པ	SW added this entry. Sanskrit is from Sarat Chandra Das dictionary.
ཉེ-བའི-ཉོན-མོངས	nye nyon; Comment: See nye nyon.
ཉེ-བའི-ཉོན-མོངས-པ	Comment: See nye nyon.
ཉེ-འཁོར-དམྱལ-བ	one of the four types of hell (dmyal ba); for others see: {དམྱལ་བ}
ཉི-ཚེ-བའི-དམྱལ-བ	one of the four types of hell; see dmyal ba for others
ཉི-མའི-གཉེན	Take example from intro verse of 70 topics ? (T)
ཉི-ཤུ-པ	Check this -- p. 128 of the dictionary Alan typed says this is a book by Asanga, and cites DASI 572.2\nCheck (T)
ཉིད	Other examples: yod pa nyid du nges pa, ascertained as only existent; mnyam nyid, equality, sameness; med pa nyid du nges pa, ascertained as just non-existent
ཉོལ	check tenses. Thumi (p.98) has nyald / nyal / nyal / nyold (T)
ཉོན-མོངས	Comment: The afflictive emotions are commonly identified as the six root afflictions and the twenty secondary afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza). The six root afflictions are: desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi). The twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
ཉོན-སྒྲིབ-སྤངས-པའི-ཆ-ནས-བཞག-པའི-མཁྱེན-པ	definition of path of no more learning (mi slob lam)
ཉོན-སྒྲིབ-ཀུན-བཏགས-དངོས-གཉེན-དུ-གྱུར-པའི-ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-བདེན-པ-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of uninterrupted path of a Hearer path of seeing (nyan thos kyi mthong lam bar chad med lam)
ཉོན-སྒྲིབ-ཀུན-བཏགས-སྤངས-པའི-རྣམ-གྲོལ-ལམ-དུ-གྱུར-པའི-ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-བདེན-པ-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of path of release of a Hearer path of meditation (nyan thos kyi mthong lam rnam grol lam)
པ	term of address
པ-ལགས	term of address
པ-ཕ	term of reference
པད	padma; stands for pad ma—transliteration of Sanskrit word, padma; see: {པ་དམ}
པད-མ	transliteration of the Sanskrit word, padma
པདྨ	transliteration of the Sanskrit word, padma
པདྨ-དཀར-པོ	(PH, from Olschak, Mystic Art of Ancient Tibet) 'White Lotus,' an epithet of the Dalai Lamas
པང	SW added this record
ཕལ-ཆེན-པ	an early Indian Buddhist school thought by some scholars to have been a predecessor of MahAyAna
ཕལ-ཆེན-སྡེ	an early Indian Buddhist school thought by some scholars to have been a predecessor of MahAyAna
ཕན-ཡོན	Check others' engl?? (T)
ཕན-ཚུན-མཚུངས-ལྡན-རྣམ-པ-ལྔ-མཚུངས-ཀྱང-ཡིན-ཕན-ཚུན-སྐྱེ-བ-ལ-གེགས-མི-བྱེད-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-པའི-གཞི-མཐུན-དུ-དམིགས-པ	Comment: This is the definition of associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu).
ཕན-ཚུན-དུས-མཉམ-རྫས-ཐ-དད-ཀྱང-ཡིན-ཕན-ཚུན-སྐྱེ-བ-ལ-གེགས-མི-བྱེད-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-པའི-གཞི-མཐུན-དུ-དམིགས-པ	definition of cooperative cause (lhan cig 'byung ba'i rgyu)
ཕན-ཚུན-སྤང-འགལ	Comment: This is one of two types of contradiction ('gal ba): mutually contradictory (phan tshun spang 'gal) such as white and non-white (dkar po dang dkar ma yin pa); and contradictory in the sense of not abiding together (lhan cig mi gnas 'gal) such as the two, antidote and object of abandonment (gnyen po dang spang bya gnyis).
ཕན-འདོགས-བྱ	one of the definitions of effect ('bras bu)
ཕན-འདོགས-བྱེད	one of the definitions of cause (rgyu)
ཕྲག-དོག	IrSyA; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
ཕྲེང-ཅན	p.n. of a wanderer; also known as Vatsagotra
ཕྲེང-ཅང	p.n. of a wanderer; also known as Vatsagotra
ཕྲེང-བ-ཅན	p.n. of a wanderer; also known as Vatsagotra
ཕྲོས	Check tenses from Thumi p.168. (T)
ཕུལ	Thumi (p.160) has 'buld for the imperative (skul tshig) (T)
ཕུང	See: {ཕུང་པོ}
ཕུང-པོ-ལྔ-པོ-གང-རུང-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-བཏགས-པའི-སྐྱེས-བུ	definition of person (gang zag)
ཕུར-བུ-པ	one of the unorthodox (nAstika) schools of Indian philosophy; they believed only in the present life and in the existence of material elements, and hence are sometimes referred to as Materialists
ཕུར-བུ-ལྕོག-བྱམས-པ-རྒྱ-མཚོ	philosophy tutor of the thirteenth Dalai Lama; his texts are currently used by Se-ra-jay college
ཕྱག-ལེན	get ex. SW added this entry
ཕྱག-རྒྱ	seal; seal is also a euphemism for a tantric consort, actual or visualized (T)
ཕྱག-རྒྱའི-ལྷ	seal deity; Comment: This is the fifth of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
ཕྱག-རྒྱ-བཞི	see: {ཕྱག་རྒྱ}
ཕྱི	Check tenses. Thumi (p.164) lists dbyi / 'byid / phyis / phyis for the verb to erase. No mention of phyi. Also, "generality" is spyi, no? (T)
ཕྱི-རབས-ཀྱི-སྐྱོ-བོའི-དོན-དུ	SW added this entry; ex. from Ship 56a.6
ཕྱི-མའི-རྒྱུད	Comment: The fourth of the Four [Medical] Tantras (rgyud bzhi) deals with methods of diagnosis such as urinalysis and pulse-taking as well as the manufacture of medicines.
ཕྱི-མོ-དང-མེས-པོ-གཉིས-ཀྱི-བདུན-རྒྱུད-ཚུན-ཆད-ཀྱི-བར-གྱི	Check Sanskrit. (T)
ཕྱི-མ-རྗེས-མཐུན-བཞི	(PH) from Perdue. what are the four? add to div. field
ཕྱི-རོལ-དོན-དུ-གྲུབ-པས-སྟོང-བ	definition of selflessness of phenomena (chos kyi bdag med)
ཕྱི-རོལ-དོན-གྱིས-སྟོང-པ	emptiness of external objects; Comment: This is one of two different subtle emptinesses set forth in Mind-Only literature. The emptiness of external objects is also called the emptiness of apprehended-objects and apprehending-subjects existing as different substantial entities (bzung 'dzin rdzas tha dad kyis stong pa). This is explained as meaning that, for instance, a form such as a table appears to be a different substantial entity from the eye consciousness apprehending it but is not. A table appears to be distant and cut off (rgyang chad du snang ba) from the apprehending consciousness but is not; thus, a table is said to be empty of being a different entity from a valid consciousness, such as an eye consciousness, cognizing it; this is the emptiness of the table. Similarly, the eye consciousness apprehending the table is not a different entity from the table that it apprehends, and thus, from this point of view, the consciousness' absence of being a different entity from the table it perceives is the emptiness of the consciousness. Both the table and the consciousness exist, but both lack a certain quality — difference of entity — in relation to each other. See also "the emptiness of factors imputed in the manner of entity and attribute" (ngo bo dang khyad bar du kun btags pas stong pa'i stong pa nyid).
ཕྱིའི-གཟུགས	external form; Comment: This is one of the two divisions of form (gzugs, rUpa): internal form (nang gi gzugs) and external form (phyi'i gzugs).
ཕྱིའི-བེམ-པོ	one of the two divisions of matter (bem po); the other being: internal matter (nang gi bem po); illustrations are: (1) pillar (ka ba); (2) pot (bum pa)
ཕྱིའི-འབྱོར-བ-ལྔ	Comment: Same as (gzhan 'byor lnga). (PH) I added the Tibetan from Gön-chok-jik-may-w#ang-b#o
ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག	Check Tib ex. 1. Should it be gnad instead of gnas? (T)
ཕྱིན-ཅི-མ-ལོག-པ-དེ-བཞིན-ཉིད	Entry originally said: ... de bzhing nyid (T)
ཕྱིར-མི-འོང-འབྲས-གནས-པ	Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
ཕྱིར-མི-འོང-ཞུགས-པ	Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
ཕྱིར-འོང-ཞུགས-པ	Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
ཕྱིར-འོང-འབྲས-གནས-པ	Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
ཕྱིས	Check tense. Thumi has (p.164): dbyi / 'byid / phyis / phyis (T)
ཕྱོགས	another example: mthun phyogs (similar class)
ཕྱོགས-བཅུར	these are: (1-4) the four cardinal directions; (5-8) the four intermediate directions (e.g., north-east ...); (9) the nadir; and (10) the zenith (T)
ཕྱོགས-ཆོས	the presence of the reason in the subject -- one of the three modes (tshul gsum); in oral debate, this is expressed as: (1) plus (3) rtags grub
ཕྱོགས-གླང	p.n. of the great Buddhist philosopher, author of the Compendium of Valid Cognition (pramANa-samuccaya)
ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-གོས-ཅན	a type of ascetic that does not wear any clothing
ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-གླང-པོ	p.n. of the great Buddhist philosopher, author of the Compendium of Valid Cognition (pramANa-samuccaya)
ཕྱུ-པ	a type of Tibetan clothing
པི-བང	SW added tenses "pi wang" from Tshig mdzod chen mo 1420.1
པི-ཝང	SW added this entry; from Tshig mdzod chen mo 1420.1
པོད	Ex from Ship 57b.2
པུར-རྒྱལ	SW added this entry
ར-མཉེ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.176) identifies this as "polygonatum verticillatum; polygonatum cathcartii; polygonatum officinale; polygonatum cirrifolium" Add?
རབ-རིབ	this refers to a wide range of eye defects, including occluded or hazy vision, seeing spots, lines, dots; etc.
རབ-ཏུ-དགའ-བ	first of the ten Bodhisattva grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
རབ-ཏུ-དབེན-པའི-ཡིད-བྱེད	one of the seven preparations (nyer bsdogs) for the first concentration, the "not unable" (mi lcogs med); for others see: {ཉེར་བསྡོགས}
རང-ལྡོག	self-isolate; one of the four types of isolates; for others see: ldog paComment: The term "self-isolate" (rang ldog) is a similarly convenient way of referring just to the object itself, pot, and not any of illustrations, such as a copper pot, or its definition.
རང-མཚན	(PH) Definition too long; too many synonyms
རང-རྒྱལ	one of the three types of Buddhist practitioner; the others are: Hearers (nyan thos, zrAvaka); and MahAyAnists (theg chen pa)
རང-ཡུལ	Check English of ex. 6 (T)
རང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-ལྡོག-ཆོས	Comment: This is one of the seven types of isolate phenomenon; for others see: ldog chos; illustration: thing's isolate (dngos po'i ldog pa)
རང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-ལྡོག-ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-མཐུན	one of the four types of concordance; for others see: rjes mthun; illustration: isolate phenomenon that is not itself (rang ma yin pa'i ldog chos)
རང-ཉིད-མེད-དགག-གི-གཞན-སེལ	Illustration: bum pa dang bum pa ma yin pa'i gzhi mthun pas stong pa\n(PH) English def. missing
རང-ཉིད-གཟུང-བ-ཆོས-གཞན-བཟུང-བ-ལ-ལྟོས-དགོས-པའི-བཏགས-ཡོད	one of the three types of imputed existent according to BJ; for others see: {བཏགས་ཡོད}
རང-ཉིད-སྐལ-མཉམ-ཀྱི-རྒྱུ	Comment: There are six types of causes: fruitional cause (rnam smin gyi rgyu), co-arisen cause (lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu), creative cause (byed rgyu), cause of similar lot (skal mnyam gyi rgyu), omnipresent cause (kun 'gro'i rgyu), and associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu).
རང-ཉིད-ཀུན-འགྲོའི-རྒྱུ	Comment: An illustration is desire ('dod chags). There are six types of causes: fruitional cause (rnam smin gyi rgyu), co-arisen cause (lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu), creative cause (byed rgyu), cause of similar lot (skal mnyam gyi rgyu), omnipresent cause (kun 'gro'i rgyu), and associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu).
རང-ཉིད-དགག-པ-ཡིན-པ	(PH) definition too long
རང-རིག-མངོན-སུམ	one of the four types of direct perception; for others see: {མངོན་སུམ}
རང-རིག-མངོན-སུམ-གྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the five types of prime cognizer that induces ascertainment by itself; for others see: {རང་ལས་ངེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ}
རང-རིག-བཅད-ཤེས	one of the four types of direct subsequent cognizer; for others see: {མངོན་སུམ་བཅད་ཤེས}
རང-བཞིན-གྱིས-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight objects of negation in the PrAsaGgika system; for others see: {དགག་བྱ}; compare: {རང་གི་མཚན་ཉིད་ཀྱིས་གྲུབ་པ}, established by way of its own character
རང-བཞིན-གྱི-རྟོག-པ-བརྒྱད-བཅུ	Comment: In the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tantra as presented in NAgArjuna's Five Stages (rim pa lnga pa, paJcakrama), conceptual consciousnesses are detailed as of eighty types, divided into three classes. The first group of thirty-three is composed of conceptual consciousnesses that involve a strong movement of "wind" to their objects. They include conceptions such as fear, attachment, hunger, thirst, compassion, acquisitiveness, and jealousy. The second group of forty conceptions is composed of conceptual consciousnesses that involve a medium movement of "wind" to their objects — conceptions such as joy, amazement, generosity, desiring to kiss, heroism, non-gentleness, and crookedness. The third group of seven conceptions involve a weak movement of "wind" to their objects — forgetfulness, mistake as in apprehending water in a mirage, catatonia, depression, laziness, doubt, and equal desire and hatred. The three groups represent, on the ordinary level of consciousness, increasingly less dualistic perception; it is clear that in the third group the mind is strongly withdrawn. They are called "indicative" because, for someone who has not experienced the three subtler levels of consciousness--mind of vivid white appearance, mind of vivid red or organge increase, and mind of black near-attainment (so called because it is near to manifesting the mind of clear light), these indicate what these consciousnesses are like.
རང-བཞིན-གྱི-ཡན-ལག	Entry originally said: yang lag (T)
རང-བཞིན-ཁྱད-པར-གསུམ	Comment: The three are (1) its entity is not produced by causes and conditions (ngo bo rgyu rkyen gyis ma bskyed pa); (2) the means of positing it does not rely upon another; (3) its state does not change into something else.
རང-མཚན-བཟུང-ཡུལ-དུ-བྱེད-པའི-རྟོག-མེད-མ-འཁྲུལ-བའི-ཤེས-པ	one of the three types of knowledge and awareness (blo rig) according to the threefold division
རང-རྐྱ-ཐུབ-པ	a criterion for self-sufficiency
རང-གི-ཡུལ	(PH) example too long
རང-གི-འཇུག-ཡུལ	(PH) examples are too long
རང-གི-ཆ-ཤས-དུ-མ-འདུས-པའི-གཟུགས-རགས-པ	definition of collection generality (tshogs spyi) SW: is "aggregation" better than "conglomeration" in the Eng.?
རང-གི-དགག-བྱ-ཤེས-བྱ-ལ-སྲིད-པའི-མེད-དགག	one of the two kinds of non-affirming negatives; see: med dgag; an illustration is: non-existence of pot (bum pa med pa)
རང-གི-དགག-བྱ-ཤེས-བྱ-ལ-མི-སྲིད-པའི-མེད-དགག	one of the two kinds of non-affirming negatives; see: med dgag; an illustration is: the selflessness of persons (gang zag gi bdag med)
རང-གི-གནས-ངན-ལེན	see: {གནས་ངན་ལེན་གྱི་འཆིང་བ}
རང-གི-གསལ-བ-ལ-རྗེས-སུ-འགྲོ-བའི-ཆོས	definition of generality (spyi)
རང-གི-ངོ-བོ	Comment: Magee found no instance of svarUpam being translated into Tibetan as rang gi gzugs.
རང-གི-ངོ-བོ-འཛིན-པ	definition of phenonenon (chos)
རང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད	Comment: There are multiple uses of such terms. For instance, consciousness (shes pa) is a specifically characterized phenonenon (rang mtshan); that which is luminous and knowing (gsal zhing rig pa) is its specific character (rang gi mtshan nyid); impermance (mi rtag) is a general character (spyi'i mtshan nyid) of consciousness shared with other products. An instance of a generally characterized phenomenon (spyi mtshan) is uncompounded space. Ge-luk-b#a scholars also identify "own-character" as referring either to objects' establishment by way of their own character (rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or to establishment by way of their own character as the referents of conceptual consciousnesses (rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or both.
རང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད-ཀྱིས-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight objects of negation in the PrAsaGgika system; for others see: {དགག་བྱ} (PH) Jeffrey, I added the english for example 2. Check
རང-ངོས-ནས-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight objects of negation in the PrAsaGgika system; for others see: {དགག་བྱ}
རང-རྒྱུད-པའི-ལུགས-ཀྱི-དགག-བྱ	object of negation in the SvAtantrika system; Comment: The subtle object of negation in the SvAtantrika system is establishment from the side of [an object's] own uncommon mode of subsistence without being posited by the power of appearing to a non-defective awareness (blo gnod med la snang ba'i dbang gis bzhag pa ma yin par yul rang gi thun mong ma yin pa'i sdod lugs kyi ngos nas grub pa).
རང-རྒྱུད-ཀྱི-སྦྱོར-བ	Comment: In a non-Ge-luk context this could refer to one's own syllogism.
རང-སངས-རྒྱས	see: rang rgyalComment: D#en-b#a-d#en-dzin explains (rang sangs rgyas) as meaning (rang gi don du sangs rgyas thob 'dod pa) "wanting to achieve buddhahood for one's own sake."
རང-ལྡོག-གཅིག-པ	Comment: This is one of the three types of sameness (gcig pa): same entity (ngo bo gcig pa); same self-isolate (rang ldog gcig pa); same type (rigs gcig pa).
རང-རྒྱལ-གྱི-མི-སློབ-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Solitary Realizers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
རང-རྒྱལ-གྱི-རྣལ-འབྱོར-མངོན-སུམ	one of the three types of yogic direct perceiver; for others see: {རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ}
རང-རྒྱལ-གྱི-སྦྱོར-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Solitary Realizers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
རང-རྒྱལ-གྱི-ཚོགས-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of Solitary Realizers: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
རང-ལས-ངེས-ཀྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the two types of prime cognizer; the other is: prime cognizer that induces ascertainment from another (gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma)
རང-ཡིན-པའི-ལྡོག-ཆོས	one of the seven types of isolate phenomenon; for others see: ldog chos; illustrations: (1) non-functioning thing (dngos med); (2) permanent phenomenon (rtag pa); (3) definiendium (mtshon bya)
རང-ཡིན-པའི-ལྡོག-ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-མཐུན	one of the four types of concordance; for others see: rjes mthun; illustration: non-isolate phenomenon that is itself (rang yin pa'i ldog chos ma yin pa)
རྡོ-ལེབ	get ex. from Ship SW added this entry
རྡོ-རྗེ-ཐལ-མོ	Comment: the two hands pressed together flat and held at the center of the chest as an expression of homage
རྡོ-རྗེ-ཁུ-ཚུར	get ex from Lag Len or rDor 'grel
རྡུལ	rajas; Comment: In SAmkhya this is one of the three material qualities (yon tan gsum, triguNa): lightness (snying stobs, sattva), 2) motility (rdul, rajas), 3) darkness (mun pa, tamas). Dzong-ka-ba's Great Exposition of Secret Mantra a passage cites a passage calling the three subtler consciousnesses preceding the mind of clear light according to the GuhyasamAja system sattva, rajas, and tamas.
རྡུལ-དུ-གྲུབ-པ	definition of matter (bem po, kaNThA)
རྫས	one of the five associational causes (mtshungs ldan lnga); for others see: {མཚུངས་ལྡན}
རྫས-ཆོས	Illustrations: (1) object of knowledge (shes bya); (2) existent (yod pa); (3) impermanent phenomenon (mi rtag pa)
རྫས-ཆོས-ལྡོག-ཆོས	one of the sections of Collected Topics (bsdus grwa)
རྫས-ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-མཐུན	Comment: An illustration of this is [functioning] thing that is an isolate phenomenon (ldog chos su gyur pa'i dngos po).
རྫས-ཡོད-ཆོས-གསུམ-ཚང-བ	definition of definition (mtshan nyid)
རྫས-སུ-ཡོད-པ	see: {རྫས་ཡོད}
རྫས-སུ-གྲུབ-པ	one of the eight objects of negation (dgag bya) in the PrAsaGgika system
རྫས-རིགས-གཅིག	one of the two divisions of one type (rigs gcig); the other is: one isolate type (ldog pa rigs gcig)
རྫི-བ	English according to Sanskrit and Thumi, p.214 (T)
རྫོང	SW added this record
རྫོངས	SW added this record
རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-ཆོ-འཕྲུལ	get Than's translation
རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	Check Tibetan of divisons. I constructed it from the English and Sanskrit. Not sure at all about it (T)
རྫུས-སྐྱེས	If rdzus or rdzus te mean "spontaneous", it would be helpful to have a separate entry (T)
རེ-ཞིག	get Tib ex from A's dKyil chog
རེག-བྱ	Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external matter (phyi'i bem po): form (gzugs); sound (sgra); smell (dri); taste (ro); tangible object (reg bya).
རེག-པ	contact is one of the five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga, paJca-sarvatraga); for others see: {ཀུན་འགྲོ}
རེག-པའི-ཟས	one of the four foods; for others see: {ཟས}
རེག-བྱའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	tangible object sense-sphere; Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external form (phyi'i gzugs): form sense-sphere (gzugs kyi skye mched); (2) sound sense-sphere (sgra'i skye mched); (3) odor sense-sphere (dri'i skye mched); (4) taste sense-sphere (ro'i skye mched); (5) tangible object sense-sphere (reg bya'i skye mched).
རེག-བྱ-འཛིན-པའི-དབང-མངོན	one of the five divisions of sense direct perceiver; for others see: {དབང་མངོན}
རེས-འགའ-བའི-རྟག-པ	one of the two types of permanent phenomena (rtag pa); the other is: permanent phenomenon that abides all the time (dus brtan pa'i rtag pa)
རྒོད-པ	Comment: By extension, distraction to hated, neutral, or even other virttous objects is included in the term.
རྒྱ-ཆེ	Comment: This sometimes refers to MahAyAna texts in general. Compare zab pa.
རྒྱ-ཆེན	Comment: See rgya che ba .
རྒྱ-ཆེར	Comment: See rgya che ba .
རྒྱ-ནག	Comment: The name probably derives from a vast country of people who wear black clothing.
རྒྱ-ཆེར-བ	Comment: See rgya che ba .
རྒྱ-ཆེན-པོ	Comment: See rgya che ba .
རྒྱ-ཆེ-བ	Comment: This sometimes refers to MahAyAna texts in general. Compare zab pa.
རྒྱལ-བའི-བསྟན-པ-མཆོག	Comment: This refers to Buddha's teaching in general but even more so to the Great Vehicle.
རྒྱལ-པོ-གཟུགས-ཅན-སྙིང-པོ	King BimbisAra; Comment: King BimbisAra had different names during various stages of his life.
རྒྱལ-པོ-དོན-གྲུབ-རྒྱལ-རིགས-དང-བྲམ-ཟེའི-རིགས-གང-རུང-ཡིན-ཞིང-བྲམ-ཟེའི-རིགས-མ-ཡིན-པ	Comment: This is an example of an affirming negative which is such that the term expressing it implies another, positive phenomenon from context (rang zhes brjod pa'i sgras rang gi 'phangs byar gyur pa'i chos gzhan sgrub pa skabs stobs kyis 'phen pa'i ma yin dgag).\nCheck (T)
རྒྱན	Comment: This often refers to Maitreya's Ornament for the Great Vehicle SUtras (mdo sde rgyan, mahAyAnasUtrAlaMkAra; P5521, vol. 108) or Ornament for Clear Realization (mngon rtogs rgyan, abhisamayAlaMkAra; P5184, vol. 88).
རྒྱན-སྡུད	Comment: The three (given in example) are used with a concordant sense, a discordant sense, or conjunction.
རྒྱང-ཕན-པ	Comment: The etymology is derogatory. See also tshu rol mdzes pa.
རྒྱང-འཕེན-པ	Check Tib ex. 1—'phren pa, not 'phen pa (T)Comment: See also tshu rol mdzes pa.
རྒྱས-པ	Comment: See rgya che ba.
རྒྱས-པར	Comment: See rgyas pa.
རྒྱས-ཤིང-འཕེལ-བ	Comment: See 'phel zhing rgyas pa (increasing and extending).
རྒྱས-འགྱུར-གྱི-རིགས	Comment: See also rang bzhin gnas rigs.
རྒྱུ	Comment: rgyu is used to make a verbal object noun as in bsgrub rgyu which means the same as bsgrub bya (that which is to be accomplished/achieved/practiced) or, in spoken Tibetan, bsgrub ya.
རྒྱུ-རྐྱེན	Cooment: Causal conditions are one of the four kinds of conditions (rkyen, pratyaya).
རྒྱུ-མཚན-ཡོད-ཀྱང-གཏན-ལ-མ-ཕེབས-པའི-ཡིད-དཔྱོད	correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it; Comment: An instance is an awareness apprehending that sound is impermanent from the sign of [its being] a product, wtihout having ascertained with valid cognition that sound is a product and that whatever is a product is necessarily impermanent (sgra byas pa dang byas na mi rtag pas khyab pa tshad mas ma nges par byas rtags las sgra mi rtag par 'dzin pa'i blo). This is one of the five divisions of correct assumption: correct assumption whose reason is not established (rgyu mtshan ma grub pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption contradictory with a reason (rgyu mtshan dang 'gal ba'i yid dpyod); correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption. For instances of each of the five, see the individual entries. do the fifth, check the order and the translations
རྒྱུ-མཚན-ལྟར-སྣང-ལ-བརྟེན-པའི-ཡིད-དཔྱོད	Comment: This is one of the three divisions of correct assumption (yid dpyod): correct assumption lacking a reason (rgyu mtshan med pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption depending upon a counterfeit reason (rgyu mtshan ltar snang la brten pa'i yid dpyod); and correct assumption in which the reason is not ascertained (rgyu mtshan ma nges pa'i yid dpyod). There is also a division of correct assumptions into five: correct assumption whose reason is not established (rgyu mtshan ma grub pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption contradictory with a reason (rgyu mtshan dang 'gal ba'i yid dpyod); correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption. For instances of each of the five, see the individual entries. do the fifth, check the order and the translations
རྒྱུ-མཚན-མ-གྲུབ-པའི-ཡིད-དཔྱོད	correct assumption whose reason is not established; Comment: An instance is an awareness apprehending sound as impermanent from the reason that it is an apprehended object of an eye consciousness (mig shes kyi gzung bya'i rtags las sgra mi rtag par 'dzin pa'i blo). This is one of the five divisions of correct assumption: correct assumption whose reason is not established (rgyu mtshan ma grub pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption contradictory with a reason (rgyu mtshan dang 'gal ba'i yid dpyod); correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption. For instances of each of the five, see the individual entries. do the fifth, check the order and the translations
རྒྱུ-མཚན-མ-ངེས-པའི-ཡིད-དཔྱོད	correct assumption in which the reason is not ascertained; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of correct assumption (yid dpyod): correct assumption lacking a reason (rgyu mtshan med pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption depending upon a counterfeit reason (rgyu mtshan ltar snang la brten pa'i yid dpyod); and correct assumption in which the reason is not ascertained (rgyu mtshan ma nges pa'i yid dpyod). There is also a division of correct assumptions into five: correct assumption whose reason is not established (rgyu mtshan ma grub pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption contradictory with a reason (rgyu mtshan dang 'gal ba'i yid dpyod); correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption. For instances of each of the five, see the individual entries. do the fifth, check the order and the translations
རྒྱུ-མཚན-དང-འགལ-བའི-ཡིད-དཔྱོད	correct assumption contradictory with a reason; Comment: An instance is an awareness apprehending sound as impermanent from the reason that it is empty of being able to perform a function (don byed nus stong gi rtags las sgra mi rtag par 'dzin pa'i blo). This is one of the five divisions of correct assumption: correct assumption whose reason is not established (rgyu mtshan ma grub pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption contradictory with a reason (rgyu mtshan dang 'gal ba'i yid dpyod); correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption. For instances of each of the five, see the individual entries. do the fifth, check the order and the translations
རྒྱུ-མཚན-མེད-པའི-ཡིད-དཔྱོད	correct assumption lacking a reason; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of correct assumption (yid dpyod): correct assumption lacking a reason (rgyu mtshan med pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption depending upon a counterfeit reason (rgyu mtshan ltar snang la brten pa'i yid dpyod); and correct assumption in which the reason is not ascertained (rgyu mtshan ma nges pa'i yid dpyod). There is also a division of correct assumptions into five: correct assumption whose reason is not established (rgyu mtshan ma grub pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption contradictory with a reason (rgyu mtshan dang 'gal ba'i yid dpyod); correct assumption for which one has a reason but has not ascertained it (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod); correct assumption. For instances of each of the five, see the individual entries. do the fifth, check the order and the translations
རྒྱུ-མཐུན-གྱི-འབྲས-བུ	Comment: One of the five kinds of effects ('bras bu). With respect to the divisions, the first would, for instance, be to kill and to be killed; the second would, for instance, be to kill and then to kill again.
རྒྱུ-མཐུན-པའི-འབྲས-བུ	Comment: See rgyu mthun gyi 'bras bu.
རྒྱུའི-ཀུན-སློང	Comment: This is often contrasted with motivation at the time [of the action] (dus kyi kun slong) as in the case of being motivated by compassion to prevent a murderer from killing 500 Foe Destroyers and at the time of killing the murderer acting with a motivation of hatred.
རྒྱུད	Comment: See rgyun.
རྒྱུད-ནས-སྐྱེ-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of indirect cause (brgyud rgyu).
རྒྱུད-སྨྲད-གྲྭ-ཚང	Commentary: In what sense this college is "lower" is doubtful.
རྒྱུན-མཐའ	Comment: This often refers to the end of the continuum of being a sentient being, that is to say, a being who still has obstructions yet to be abandoned, and thus it means right before Buddhahood.
རྒྱུན-བཅད-བྱ-གཅོད-བྱེད-ཀྱི-སྒོ-ནས-མི-མཐུན-པར-གནས-པ	Comment: This is the definition of contradictory in the sense of not abiding together (lhan gcig mi gnas 'gal).
རྒྱུན-ཞུགས-ཞུགས-པ	Approacher to Stream Enterer; Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
རྒྱུན-ཞུགས-འབྲས-གནས	Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer; Comment: This is one of the eight types of enterers and abiders (zhugs gnas brgyad): Approacher to Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Stream Enterer (rgyun zhugs 'bras gnas); Approacher to Once Returner (phyir 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of Once Returner (phyir 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Never Returner (phyir mi 'ong zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (phyir mi 'ong 'bras gnas); Approacher to Foe Destroyer (dgra bcom zhugs pa); Abider in the Fruit of (dgra bcom 'bras gnas). For the Sanskrit see the individual entries.
རྒྱུན-མཐར-སྐྱེ-བ	Comment: See rgyun mtha' kho nar skye ba.
རྒྱུན-མཐའ-ཁོ-ནར-སྐྱེ-བ	production only at the end of a continuum; Comment: This is one of the three assertions concerning mental direct perceptions indicated on this occasion (skabs 'dir bstan gyi yid mngon): production only at the end of a continuum (rgyun mtha' kho nar skye ba); alternating production (spel mar skye ba); and production in three types ('gros gsum par skye ba).
རྒྱུན-བཅས-ཀྱི-དངོས-པོ	Comment: This is equivalent to substantial cause (nyer len).
རི-རབ	the mountain which is at the center of the universe in traditional Buddhist cosmology
རི-དྭགས-ཨཻ-ན-ཡའི-བྱིན-པ-ལྟ-བུ	Check entry's transliteration of "eNeya" (T)
རིག	see: {རིག་པ}; {བློ}
རིག-པ	(PH) Jeffrey, since blo and rig pa are definition/definiendum they shouldn't be listed as synonyms, right?
རིག-པར-གནས	abodes of knowledge refers to the five branches of traditional Buddhist learning: philosophy, logic, grammar, medicine, and arts and crafts
རིག-པའི-དབང	Entry originally said "bdang" (T)
རིག-པའི-གནས	rig gnas; rig gnas chung ba lnga need to be translated SW added divisions, from Tshig mdzod 2 vol. 2682.1; ex. from Ship 61b.3
རིག-པ-གསུམ	these are: knowledge of the past lives of oneself and others; supernatural insight into future mortal conditions; and knowledge that one has overcome all afflictions and that this is one's final birth\nWhat's the Tibetan for these? (T)
རིགས-ཤེས	Comment: A non-conceptual ultimate consciousness is one of meditative equipoise in which a yogi directly realizes emptiness, whereas a conceptual ultimate consciousness is one that realizes emptiness through the medium of a conceptual image. Both are called "reasoning consciousnesses" most likely because they are generated from having analyzed with reasoning to determine whether an object exists in accordance with (in the Mind-Only system) the superimposition of the imputational nature. (PH) qualification "in M-O" added. needed?
རིགས-སྤྱི	Comment: This is one of the three types of generality; for others see: spyi; llustrations are (1) object of knowledge (shes bya); (2) thing (dngos po); (3) pot (bum pa).
རིགས-ཐིག	Original entry was "righs thik" (T)
རིགས-གཅིག-པ	same type; Comment: This is one of the three types of sameness (gcig pa): same entity (ngo bo gcig pa); same self-isolate (rang ldog gcig pa); same type (rigs gcig pa).
རིགས-པའི-སྒོ-དུ-མ	approaches of reasoning; Comment: Gung-tang identifies the "approaches of reasoning" as the reasonings of dependent-arising and so forth used to establish the emptiness of inherent existence.
རིགས-པའི-ཐིགས-པ-ཞེས-བྱ-བའི-རབ-ཏུ-བྱེད-པ	see: {རིགས་ཐིཀ}
རིགས-པ-དྲུག-ཅུ-པ	one of the "Six Collections of Reasonings"; for others see: rigs tshogs]
རིགས-པ-དྲུག-ཅུ-པའི-ཚིག-ལེའུར-བྱས-པ	one of the "Six Collections of Reasonings"; for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས}
རིགས-མཐུན-གྱི-བག-ཆགས	Comment: There are four types of predispositions in Ge-luk-b#a explanations of Mind-Only (sems tsam): predispositions of [perceptions of] similar type (rigs mthun gyi bag chags); predispositions of verbalization (mngon brjod kyi bag chags, abhilApavAsanA); predispositions of the view of self (bdag lta'i bag chags, AtmadRStivAsanA); predispositions of the branches of cyclic existence (srid pa'i yan lag gi bag chags, bhavAGgavAsanA.
རིགས-ཐིག-དར	Original entry was "rigs thik dar" (T)
རིགས-ཐིག-ཀྱི-ཕྱོགས-སྔ-མདོར-བསྡུས	Is there really such a book?
རིགས-ཐིག-དར-ཊིཀ	Original entry was "rigs thik dar Tik" (T)
རིགས-བྱེད-པ	an adherent of the MImAMsa school, one of the six orthodox Hindu philosophical schools (darzana); see also: dpyod pa can
རིན-ཆེན-ཕྲེང-བ	one of the "Six Collections of Reasonings"; for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས}
རིང-དུ-སོང-བ	seventh of the ten Bodhisattva grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
རྗེ-བཙུན-ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	Need dates (T)
རྗེན-ཆར	Check entry (T)
རྗེན-ཆེར	Check entry (T)
རྗེས-དཔག	Comment: This is one of the three divisions of inference (rjes dpag)—inference through power of the fact (dngos stobs rjes dpag), inference through renown (grags pa'i rjes dpag), and inference through belief (yid ches rjes dpag). Inference is one of the seven types of knowledge and awareness (blo rig); see blo rig for others.
རྗེས-ཁྱབ	one of the three modes (tshul gsum); the others are: subject-quality (phyogs chos) and reverse pervasion (ldog khyab); its form is: (3) yin na (2) yin pa'i khyab -- being (3) entails being (2)
རྗེས-སུ	example is not really demonstrative of meaning (T)
རྗེས-ཐོབ	I fiddled with translation of example, please check (T)
རྗེས-དཔག-གི-རྗེས-སུ-བྱུང-བའི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is an instance of a conceptual consciousness arisen from inference (rjes su dpag pa las byung ba'i rtog pa).
རྗེས-དཔག-གི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
རྗེས-དཔག-ཚད-མ	rjes su dpag pa'i tshad ma; See rjes su dpag pa'i tshad ma for definition
རྗེས-དཔག-གིས-དྲངས-པའི-རྟོག-པ-བཅད-ཤེས	conceptual subsequent cognition induced by inference; Comment: This is one of the two types of conceptual subsequent cognition (rtog pa bcad shes): conceptual subsequent cognition induced by direct perception (mngon sum gis drangs pa'i rtog pa bcad shes), an illustration of which is fix; and conceptual subsequent cognition induced by inference, an illustration of which is the second moment of an inference realizing that sound is impermanent (sgra mi rtag rtogs kyi rjes dpag skad cig gnyis pa).
རྗེས-ལ-མངོན-རྟོགས	definition of path of meditation (sgom lam); (PH) This entry is listed as synonymous with its definiendum?
རྗེས-ཁྱབ-རྣལ-མ	one of the four types of normative pervasion (khyab pa rnal ma); for others see: {ཁྱབ་པ་རྣལ་མ}; see also: {ཁྱབ་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག}
རྗེས-ཁྱབ-ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག	one of the four types of perverse pervasion (khyab pa phyin ci log); example: whatever is a definiendium is necessarily not permanent (mtshon bya yin na / rtag pa ma yin pas khyab); for others see: {ཁྱབ་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག}; see also: {ཁྱབ་པ་རྣལ་མ}
རྗེས-སུ-འཛིན	SW added ex
རྗེས-སུ-གཟུང	SW added ex
རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	Tenses ?? (T)
རྗེས-སུ-མཐུན-པ	Combine with above (T)
རྗེས-སུ-འཕྲང-དགོས	Is 'phrang a misspelling of 'brang?? (T)
རྗེས-སུ-བརྟག-པ	Tenses OK?? (T)
རྗེས-སུ-བསྟན-པ	Tense?? (T)
རྗེས-སུ-དཔག-པའི-ཚད-མ	Example: inferential cognizer which knows that sound is impermanent (sgra mi rtag rtogs kyi rjes dpag)
རྗེས-སུ-དཔག-པ-ལས-བྱུང-བའི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
རྗེས-སུ-དཔྱད-པ	Tenses?? (T). Check entry. Which is it?? (T)
རྗེས-སུ-སྤྱད-པ	Check entry. Which is it?? (T)
རྗོད-བྱེད	See: {བརྗོད}
རྗོད-བྱེད-ཀྱི-སྒྲ	See: brjod; ??? compare with: brjod byed kyi sgra ??? (PH)
རློག	I entered this an following records from Thumi, p.242, since there were records like brlag nas, which relate to this verb (T)
རློགས	I entered this record from Thumi, p.242 (T)
རློམ-པ	See previous record's comment (T)Comment: referring to a quality of mind.
རློམས	See comment under "lrom" (T)
རླུང	Comment: This is one of the four great elements ('byung bar gyur pa'i reg bya, tangible objects which are elements): earth (sa), water (chu), fire (me), and wind (rlung). In the Buddhist medical system, wind is one of the three problematics (nyes pa; doza), often mistranslated as "humours," but the "humours" are fluids as in the four elemental fluids of the body--blood, phlegm, black bile, and yellow bile. In Buddhist medicine the three problematics, which, when in balance, promote health and, when imbalanced, promote disease, are wind (rlung), bile (mkhris pa), and phlegm (pad kan).
རྨངས-མོ	Comment: The 98th Gan-den Tri-b#a (dga' ldan khri pa) Jam-b#el-shen-pen ('jam dpal gzhan phan) explains, "Base" (rmangs) means the support of a wall, as in "foundation" (rmangs gzhi). Since it refers to something low, if you call someone "Base one!" (rmangs mo), you are saying they are the lowest and the worst.
རྨི-ལམ-རྨིས-པ	get ex from Ship 65b.4 SW added tenses and Engl.
རྨི-ལམ-དུ-རྨིས-པ	get ex from Ship 65b.4
རྨུགས-པ	Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
རྣ-ཤེས	one of the five divisions of sense consciousness (dbang shes); the other four correspond to the other senses
རྣ-སྟག	SW added this entry
རྣ-བའི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	See: {རྣ་ཤེས}
རྣ-བའི-དབང-པ	one of the five divisions of internal matter (nang gi bem po); the other four correspond to the other senses
རྣ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-ཉན-བྱ	definition of sound-source (sgra'i skye mched)
རྣལ-འབྱོར-སྤྱོད-པའི-ས	Don't quite know how to format this one. ??? (T)
རྣལ-འབྱོར-སྤྱོད-པ-པ	Yogic Practitioners; Comment: They are called "Yogic Practitioners" because they delineate the practice of the deeds of the path from the yogic point of view.
རྣལ-འབྱོར-མངོན-སུམ	one of the four types of direct perceiver; for others see: {མངོན་སུམ}
རྣལ-འབྱོར-མངོན-སུམ-གྱི-ཚད-མ	one of the five types of direct perceiver that induces ascertainment from itself; for others see: {རང་ལས་ངེས་ཀྱི་ཚད་མ}
རྣལ-འབྱོར-མངོན-སུམ-བཅད-ཤེས	one of the four types of direct subsequent cognizer; for others see: {མངོན་སུམ་བཅད་ཤེས}
རྣམ-གཡེང	See: {རྣམ་པར་གཡེང་པ}
རྣམ-གྲངས	(PH) Jeffrey, verify "synonym" vis a vis ex.3
རྣམ-མཁྱེན	Get definition from seventy topics (T)
རྣམ-པ	one of the mtshungs ldan lnga; for others see: {མཚུངས་ལྡན}
རྣམ-རིག	Comment: The second chapter of AsaGga's Summary of the Great Vehicle, entitled "The Character of Objects of Knowledge," lists fifteen "cognitions," which are categories of phenomena. They are: 1. Cognitions of the body: the five sense powers, 2. Cognitions of the embodied: the afflicted mentality, 3. Cognitions of the enjoyer: the mind constituent, that is, the mental consciousness, 4. Cognitions of what is used by those: the six objects, 5. Cognitions of what uses those: the six consciousnesses, 6. Cognitions of time: the continuity of cyclic existence, 7. Cognitions of enumeration: numbering, 8. Cognitions of location: the world of the environment, 9. Cognitions of conventions: the four conventions — the seen (drSTa), the heard (zruta), the known (vijJAta), and the understood (mata), 10. & 11. Cognitions of the specifics of self and others: perceptions of self and other, 12. Cognitions of good transmigrations: humans and gods, 13. Cognitions of bad transmigrations: animals, hungry ghosts, and hell-beings, 14. Cognitions of death, 15. Cognitions of birth. The first nine arise from latent predispositions of verbalization (mngon brjod kyi bag chags) also called predispositions of verbal repetition (zlos pa'i bag chags). The tenth and the eleventh arise from latent predispositions of the view of self, also called predispositions of the view of the transitory collection ('jig tshogs la lta ba'i bag chags). The twelfth through the fifteenth arise from latent predispositions of the causal branches of existence, also called predispositions of maturation (rnam smin gyi bag chags).
རྣམ-སྨིན	Synonym: fruitional result (rnam smin gyi 'bras bu)
རྣམ-བཞག-རིམ-པའི-རྣམ-བཤད	Check English (T)
རྣམ-པ-མེད-པར-སྨྲ-བ	see: {རྣམ་པ་དང་བཅས་པར་སྨྲ་བ}
རྣམ-པ-དང-བཅས-པར-སྨྲ-བ	see: {རྣམ་པ་མེད་པར་སྨྲ་བ}
རྣམ-ཤེས-ཚོགས-བརྒྱད	These are the eight types of consciousness in the Mind-only School Following Scripture, which are: the five sense consciousnesses (indriyavijJAna, dbang shes); a mental consciousness (manovijJAna, yid shes); a mind afflicted with egoism (kliSTamanas, nyon yid); and a mind-basis-of-all (AlayaviJAna, kun gzhi rnam shes) (T)
རྣམ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-ཟས	one of the four sustenances (zas); for others see: zas\nEntry originally said "las" instead of "zas" (T)
རྣམ-ཤེས-ལས-འདས-པ	(PH) add contextual references to Dolb#o-b#a?
རྣམ-ཤེས-མཐའ-ཡས	one of the four formless absorptions
རྣམ-རིག-པ	Proponents of Cognition; Comment: They are called "Proponents of Cognition" because they propound that all phenomena are of the nature of fifteen cognitions.
རྣམ-མཁྱེན-གྱིས-རྟོགས-པར-བྱ-བ	definition of object of cognition by an omniscient consciousness (rnam mkhyen gyi gzhal bya, sarvAkAra-jJAna-prameya)
རྣམ-གྲངས-པའི-ཀུན-བརྟགས	one of the two types of imputations according to BJ; the other is imputations of which the character is thoroughly cut off (mtshan nyid yongs su chad pa'i kun brtags); there are two kinds of rnam grangs pa'i kun brtags: (1) posited by names and terminology; (2) not posited by names and terminology
རྣམ-རྫུན-པ	one of the types of Proponents of Mind-Only (sems tsam pa, citta-mAtrin); for others see: {སེམས་ཙམ་པ}
རྣམ-རྫུན-དྲི-བཅས-པ	one of the types of Proponents of Mind-Only (sems tsam pa, citta-mAtrin); for others see: {སེམས་ཙམ་པ}
རྣམ-བཅད-ཡོངས-གཅོད-གང-ཞིག-གཉིས-དང-གཉིས-མ-ཡིན-གྱི-ཕུང-གསུམ-སེལ-བ	definition of directly contradictory (dngos 'gal)
རྣམ-བཅད-ཡོངས-གཅོད-ཀྱི-སྒོ-ནས-མི-མཐུན-པར-གནས-པ	Comment: This is the definition of the mutually contradictory (phan tshun spang 'gal), which is one of two types of contradiction ('gal ba): mutually contradictory (phan tshun spang 'gal) such as white and non-white (dkar po dang dkar ma yin pa); and contradictory in the sense of not abiding together (lhan cig mi gnas 'gal) such as the two, antidote and object of abandonment (gnyen po dang spang bya).
རྣམ-པར-བསམ	JH: check ex. Eng 1; SW added it
རྣམ-པར-བསམས	JH: check ex. Eng 1; SW added it
རྣམ-པར-སེམས	JH: check ex. Eng 1; SW added it
རྣམ-པར-སོམས	JH: check ex. Eng 1; SW added it
རྣམ-པར-འཚེ-བ	vihiMsA; harmfulness; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) vihiMsA (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
རྣམ-པར-གཡེང-བ	distraction; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
རྣམ-པར-གྱུར-པ	unbalanced state; Comment: In the medical tree, this refers to the trunk of the unhealthy body, or diseased body, abiding in an unbalanced state.
རྣམ-པར-མི-འཚེ-བ	non-harmfulness; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
རྣམ-པར-མ-གྱུར-པ	balanced state; Comment: In the medical tree, this refers to the trunk of the healthy body abiding in a normal balanced state.
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-རྐྱེན-གྱིས-མིང-དང-གཟུགས	This is the third link of dependent arising (rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba)
རྣམ-པར-བཏགས-པའི-གཟུགས	imputed form; Comment: One in the triad of imputational form (kun brtags pa'i gzugs), imputed form (rnam par brtags pa'i gzugs), and form of reality (chos nyid kyi gzugs), the last meaning the reality of form in Ge-luk and noumenal form in Jo-nang. These three correspond to the three natures of a form: imputational nature, other-powered nature, and thoroughly established nature of a form.
རྣམ-པར-དག-པའི-དམིགས-པ	Comment: Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso takes this term to mean "object of observation that is purified [that is, devoid] of contamination" (zag bcas kyis rnam par dag pa'i lam gyi dmigs pa). However, other scholars more cogently take the term as referring to an object that is such that meditation upon it purifies obstructions. For instance, Jam-y#ang-shay-b#a, in speaking about the ultimate that is explicitly indicated at this point, qualifies the term "object of observation of purification" (rnam dag gi dmigs pa) with the phrase, "that which is such that, when it is observed and then is meditated upon, the obstructions to omniscience become purified" (gang la dmigs nas bsgom na shes sgrib dag par 'gyur ba).
རྣམ-སྨིན-གྱི-རྒྱུ	fruitional cause; Comment: There are six types of causes: fruitional cause (rnam smin gyi rgyu), co-arisen cause (lhan cig byung ba'i rgyu), creative cause (byed rgyu), cause of similar lot (skal mnyam gyi rgyu), omnipresent cause (kun 'gro'i rgyu), and associational cause (mtshungs ldan gyi rgyu).
རྣམ-སྨིན-གྱི-བག-ཆགས	Comment: These are predispositions that generate effects of maturation as an entire lifetime, such as a happy transmigration or a bad transmigration.
རྣམ-སྨིན-གྱི-འབྲས-བུ	one of the five types of effect ('bras bu); for others see: 'bras bu; whatever is a life faculty of a being in cyclic existence is a fruitional result, and is the effect of an impelling action.
རྣམ-སྨིན-རྣམ-ཤེས	(PH) added parenthetical gloss. based on context. check
རྔ-ཡབ	cAmara; Comment: This is one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
རྔ-ཡབ-གཞན	aparacAmara; Comment: This is one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
རྙེས	See: {རྙེད}
རོ-འཛིན-དབང-མངོན	one of the five divisions of sense direct perceiver; for others see: {དབང་མངོན}
རོ-ཙ-བ	Comment: in terms of the practice of Secret Mantra, the union of male and female is used with an entirely different consciousness. In this practice, the bliss arising from union of male and female is used to realize the emptiness of inherent existence in a totally non-dualistic and powerful way. For this practice to be effective, the regenerative fluid must be in good condition, and thus the importance of virilification is not limited to bringing physical pleasure or maintaining a family lineage but also includes enhancement of a high state of spiritual experience.
རོའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	taste sense-sphere; Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external form (phyi'i gzugs): form sense-sphere (gzugs kyi skye mched); (2) sound sense-sphere (sgra'i skye mched); (3) odor sense-sphere (dri'i skye mched); (4) taste sense-sphere (ro'i skye mched); (5) tangible object sense-sphere (reg bya'i skye mched).
རྟག-མེད	See: {མི་རྟག་པ}, impermanent
རྟག-པ-མེད	See: {རྟག་མེད}, impermanent
རྟག-པ-རྟག-པ-དུས	Compare: {ཐེར་ཟུག་ཐེར་ཟུག་གི་དུས}, forever.
རྟགས-འཛིན-སེམས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is one of the seven types of facsimiles of direct perception (mngon sum ltar snang): mistaken conceptions ('khrul ba'i rtog pa), conventional conceptions (kun rdzob kyi rtog pa), inferential conceptions (rjes dpag gi rtog pa), conceptions arisen from inference (rjes dpag las byung ba'i rtog pa), memory conceptions (dran pa'i rtog pa), wishing conceptions (mngon 'dod kyi rtog pa), and non-conceptual facsimilies of direct perception (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
རྟེན	Comment: one of the similar associations (?) (mtshungs ldan lnga); for others see: {མཚུངས་ལྡན}
རྟེན-འབྲེལ-ཡན-ལག-བཅུ-གཉིས	(PH) The Sanskrit here seems wrong. Shouldn't it be something like dvadaza-????????-pratitya etc...
རྟིང-པ	SW added this entry; got definitions from Tshig 1071.2. Get example from Bu.
རྟོག-གེ	Need English for example (T)
རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is one of the four changeable mental factors (gzhan gyur bzhi, catvAri-anyathAbhAvA); for others see: gzhan gyur. In relation to analysis (dpyod pa), investigation (rtog pa) is considered to be a more coarse type of examination.\n In the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tantra as presented in NAgArjuna's Five Stages (rim pa lnga pa, paJcakrama), conceptual consciousnesses are detailed as of eighty types, divided into three classes. The first group of thirty-three is composed of conceptual consciousnesses that involve a strong movement of "wind" to their objects. They include conceptions such as fear, attachment, hunger, thirst, compassion, acquisitiveness, and jealousy. The second group of forty conceptions is composed of conceptual consciousnesses that involve a medium movement of "wind" to their objects — conceptions such as joy, amazement, generosity, desiring to kiss, heroism, non-gentleness, and crookedness. The third group of seven conceptions involve a weak movement of "wind" to their objects — forgetfulness, mistake as in apprehending water in a mirage, catatonia, depression, laziness, doubt, and equal desire and hatred. The three groups represent, on the ordinary level of consciousness, increasingly less dualistic perception; it is clear that in the third group the mind is strongly withdrawn. They are called "indicative" because, for someone who has not experienced the three subtler levels of consciousness--mind of vivid white appearance, mind of vivid red or organge increase, and mind of black near-attainment (so called because it is near to manifesting the mind of clear light), these indicate what these consciousnesses are like.
རྟོག-ཡུལ-ན-ཡོད-པའི-རྟགས-ལས-རི-བོང-ཅན-ལ-ཟླ-སྒྲས-བརྗོད-རུང-དུ-རྟོགས-པའི-རྗེས-དཔག	example of inferential cognizer through renown (grags pa'i rjes dpag)
རྟོག-མེད-ལོག-ཤེས	one of the two types of mistaken consciousnesses (log shes, bhrAnti-jJAna); the other is conceptual mistaken consciousness (rtog pa log shes, kalpanA-bhrAnti-jJAna)
རྟོག-མེད-མངོན-སུམ-ལྟར-སྣང	Comment: This is one of the seven types of counterfeit direct perceptions (mngon sum ltar snang; for others see mngon sum ltar snang).
རྟོག-པའི-སྣང-ཡུལ	one of the six synonyms of permanent phenomenon (rtag pa) according to B-7; for others see: rtag pa. Not to be confused with 'objects that appear to thought' (yul de rtog pa la snang ba) (GD:547)
རྟོག-པ-ལོག-ཤེས	conceptual mistaken consciousness; one of the two types of mistaken consciousnesses (log shes, bhrAnti-jJAna); the other is non-conceptual mistaken consciousness (rtog med log shes, akalpanA-bhrAnti-jJAna)
རྟོག-པ-བཅད-ཤེས	one of the two types of subsequent cognizer (bcad shes); the other is direct subsequent cognizer (mngon sum bcad shes, pratyakSa-paricchinna-jJAna)
རྟོག-པ-དང-བྲལ-ཞིང-མ-འཁྲུལ-བའི-འཛིན-རྣམ	definition of self-knowing direct perceiver (rang rig mngon sum)
རྟོག-པ-དང-བྲལ-ཞིང-མ-འཁྲུལ-བའི-གསར-དུ-མི-སླུ-བའི-རིག-པ	definition of valid direct perceiver (mngon sum gyi tshad ma)
རྟོག-པ-དང-བྲལ-ཞིང-མ-འཁྲུལ-བའི-རིག-པ	definition of direct perceiver (mngon sum)
རྟོག-པ-ལ-སྣང-བ	one of the six synonyms of permanent phenomenon (rtag pa) according to B-7; for others see: {རྟག་པ}
རྩ-ཉོན	mUla-kleza; Comment: Root afflictions are one of six main groupings of mental factors (sems byung, caitta): (1) five omnipresent (kun 'gro, sarvatraga) mental factors; (2) five determining (yul nges, viSaya-pratiniyama) mental factors; (3) eleven virtuous (dge ba, kuzala) mental factors; (4) six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUla-kleza); (5) twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyong, upakleza); and (6) four changeable (gzhan 'gyur, anyathAbhAva) mental factors.
རྩ-བ-ཤེས-རབ	one of NAgArjuna's Six Collections of Reasonings (rigs tshogs drug); for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས}
རྩ-བར-འདོད-ན	This phrase is used as a shorthand form in debate texts, where the defender accepts a consequence which, if the reasoning is pursued backward, would lead to his acceptance of the first consequence of the debate
རྩ-བའི-རྒྱུད	Comment: The first of the Four [Medical] Tantras (rgyud bzhi) is a short text and mainly presents an outline of the whole medical teaching.
རྩ-བའི-ཁ-དོག	one of the two divisions of color; the other is: secondary colors (yan lag gi kha dog, aGga-varNa)
རྩ-བའི-ཉོན-མོངས	rtsa nyon; Comment: For the six types, see rtsa nyon.
རྩ-བའི-ཉོན-མོངས-པ	Comment: For the six types, see rtsa nyon.
རྩ-བའི-རང-བཞིན	(PH) The source given in Magee's footnote reads "Deussen, 48." which refers to: Paul Deussen, _Sixty UpaniSads of the Veda_. Was this also the source for the Tibetan (doubtful)? Is there an example sentence?
རྩལ-དུ-གསོལ	ck sp stsal get ex from Ship SW added this record
རྩེ-མོ	second level of the path of preparation (sbyor lam, prayoga-mArga); for other levels see: {སྦྱོར་ལམ}
རྩོད-བཟློག	one of NAgArjuna's "Six Collections of Reasonings" (rigs tshogs drug); for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས}
རྩོད-སྤོང	that arise in concerning one's presentation; this is a standard part of a monastic textbook (yig cha), usually the third part
རྩོད-པ-སྤོང-བ	see: {རྩོད་སྤོང}
རྩོལ-བ	compare: {འབད་པ}, striving; brtson 'grus, effort
རྩོམ	Thumi, p.204, has rtsoms for the imperative (T)
རྩོམ-པ	Thumi, p.204, has rtsoms for the imperative (T)
རུམ	SW added this record
ས	earth is one of the four tangible objects that are elements ('byung bar gyur pa'i reg bya); the others are: fire (me); water (chu); and wind (rlung); Other examples of grounds are: nyan thos kyi sa = ground of Hearers; rang sangs rgyas kyi sa = ground of Solitary Realizers; lus kyi gnad che sar = at important places in the body\n(PH) Def. too long
ས-བོན	in the Mind-Only (sems tsam, citta-mAtra) school, this is a synonym of bag chags; in the Consequentialist (thal 'gyur, prAsaGgika) school, it is not the same as bag chags
ས-གནོན	the name of the mudrA of the Buddha's touching the earth to call the earth goddess to witness his achievements
ས-སྡེ	(PH) div. too long
ས-མ-ཡ	Vow is sdom pa, and these are different, no? (T)
ས-སྟོན-པ	one of the eighteen VaibhAShika schools according to some renditions (T)
ས-རབ-ཏུ-དགའ-བ	the first of the ten Bodhisattva grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
སའི-དངོས-གཞི	Don't quite know how to format this one. ??? (T)
སད-མི-མི-བདུན	Comment: the first seven Tibetans ordained as monks as a test to see if Tibetans were fit for monastic life
སངས-རྒྱས	etymology of sangs rgyas [awakened-spread] is one who has awakened (from the sleep of ignorance) and spread (his intellect to all objects of knowledge)
སངས-རྒྱས-བཅོམ-ལྡན-འདས	Comment: The term bcom ldan 'das is translated in accordance with the etymology favored in Tibet, where it is recognized that bhagavan also can be etymologized as "one who possesses the six goodnesses" (legs pa drug dang ldan pa), which seems to fit the more widely used translation as "Blessed One."
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ཆོས	Buddha-qualities are the knowledge, attainments, methods, and teachings associated with a Buddha
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-གོ-འཕང	Entry did say "sang rgyas ..." (T)
སངས-རྒྱས-གཅིག-པ-ཉིད-དང-དུ-མ-ཉིད-མ-ཡིན	Check English. cf. du ma nyid ma yin (T)
སངས-རྒྱས-གསང-བ	Buddhaguhya; Comment: Three Indian scholars are renowned especially for their works on Yoga Tantra, whom New Translation Schools consider the "Three People Expert/Proficient in Yoga [Tantra]" (yoga la mi mkhas pa gsum): Buddhaguhya (sangs rgyas gsang ba; fl. mid eighth century), ShAkyamitra (shA kya bshes gnyen), and A#nandagarbha (kun dga' snying po; fl. late ninth or early tenth century). Buddhaguhya authored the Entry into the Meaning of the Tantra (rgyud kyi don la 'jug pa, tantrArthAvatara), as well as commentaries on Action and Performance Tantras. As an important figure in N#ying-ma MahAyoga lineages he taught Padmasambhava and Vimalamitra and authored texts.
སྦྱང-དཀའ	fifth Bodhisattva ground; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
སྦྱང-དཀའ-བ	fifth Bodhisattva ground; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
སྦྱངས-པ-མཁྱེན-པའི-ཡོན-ཏན	SW added this record
སྦྱར	another example: [ee-dX-v-[(]-[f-az#-lRR[-ac-f-NRRÅc! (dgag bya la don dam pa'i khyad par ma sbyar) the qualification "ultimately" is not affixed to the object of negation
སྦྱོར-ལམ	path of preparation; Comment: This is one of the five paths (lam): path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
སྦྱོར-བ-ལ-ལྡེམ-པོར-དགོངས-པ	Comment: dgongs pa (abhiprAyA) is often mistranslated as "intention." As Bel-den-chö-jay says:\n\n"Thought" (dgongs pa) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating the basis in [Buddha's] thought, "Thinking of this, [such and such] was said," and "intention" (ldem dgongs) is [posited] from the viewpoint of indicating purpose, "[Such and such] was said for this purpose." Since thought and intention are posited in different ways with respect to one non-literal sUtra, [a sUtra having an] intention and [a sUtra having a] thought must be asserted as mutually inclusive. The basis in [Buddha's] thought is just what the Teacher has set in [his] mind and is not relative to another, the trainee, and purpose definitely must rely on another, the trainee, since it is for sake of taking care of another. See Ann, dngos, 134.5.\n\nFour Intentions:\nIntending entry [into the teaching] (gzhug pa la ldem por dgongs pa, avatAranAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending the [three] characters (mtshan nyid la ldem por dgongs pa, lakSaNAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending an antidote (gnyen po la ldem por dgongs pa, pratipakSAbhisaMdhi)\nIntending translation (sbyor ba la ldem por dgongs pa/ bsgyur ba la ldem por dgongs pa, pariNAmAbhisaMdhi)\n\nFour Thoughts\nThinking of sameness (mnyam pa nyid la dgongs pa, samatAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another meaning (don gzhan la dgongs pa, arthAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of another time (dus gzhan la dgongs pa, kAlAntarAbhiprAya)\nThinking of a person's attitude (gang zag gi bsam pa la dgongs pa, pudgalAntarAbhiprAya)
སྡེ	"sde" is not a continuative! [de te ste are the lhag bcas gsum]
སྡེ-བདུན	(PH) Jeffrey, there are too many entries in the Divisions field
སྡོད	Check tenses (T)
སྡོད-པ	See previous record re: tenses (T)
སྡོམ-པ	compare: {དམ་ཚིག}, pledge
སྡུག	also short for sdug bsngal, suffering
སྡུག-བསྔལ-དྭང-ལེན-གྱི-བཟོད-པ	Comment: There are three types of patience: (1) ; (2) patience/forbearance which is voluntary assumption of suffering (sdug bsngal dwang len gyi bzod pa); (3) patience/forbearance of the definite realization of doctrine (chos la nges rtogs kyi bzod pa).
སེ-རྭ	Comment: said to be called this because its founder Jam-chen-chö-jay announced, "I will build a monastic university like a rain of hail and a hermitage above it for myself like the sun melting the hail, the latter being called Sun Hermitage."
སེ-གོལ-གཏོགས	usually it's "se gol brdab" SW added this record
སེལ-འཇུག	these are either awarenesses (blo) or expressive sounds (sgra)
སེལ-བྱེད	(PH) a better example sentence would be good here.
སེལ-འཇུག-གི-བློ	one of the three types of eliminative engagers, according to Jay-dzün-ba; for others see: {སེལ་འཇུག}
སེལ-འཇུག-གི-སྒྲ	one of the three types of eliminative engagers, according to Jay-dzün-ba; for others see: {སེལ་འཇུག}
སེལ-འཇུག-གི-གང-ཟག	one of the three types of eliminative engagers, according to Jay-dzün-ba; for others see: {སེལ་འཇུག}
སེམས	delete Eng trans "[in the sense of have an opinion]"? (SW)
སེམས-བསྐྱེད	Comment: In the division into four, the first refers to the mind-generations of the paths of accumulation (tshogs lam) and preparation (sbyor lam), the second to the mind-generations of the first seven grounds of Bodhisattva Superiors, the third to the mind-generations of the eighth, ninth, and tenth grounds of Bodhisattva Superiors, and the fourth to the mind-generations of Buddhas.
སེམས-བྱུང	Comment: For each group of mental factors see the respective headings: kun 'gro; yul nges; dge ba; rtsa nyon; nye nyon; gzhan 'gyur.
སེམས-དབེན	mental isolation; Comment: This is the third of the six stages of the completion stage in the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tanta: physical isolation (lus dben), verbal isolation (ngag dben), mental isolation (sems dben), illusory body (sgyus lus), clear light ('od gsal), union (zung 'jug).
སེམས-དྲུག	this refers to the five sense-consciousnesses—eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, and body-consciousness—and the mental consciousness ?? (T)
སེམས-པ	one of the five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga, paJca-sarvatraga); for others see: {ཀུན་འགྲོ}
སེམས-འགྲེལ-སྐོར-གསུམ	Comment: Dol-b#o-b#a S#hay-rap-gyel-tsen refers to these three as the quintessential instructions of tenth grounders. These are KalkI PuNDarIka's (rigs ldan pad ma dkar po) Great Commentary on the "KAlachakra Tantra": Stainless Light (bsdus pa'i rgyud kyi rgyal po dus kyi 'khor lo'i 'grel bshad rtsa ba'i rgyud kyi rjes su 'jug pa stong phrag bcu gnyis pa dri ma med pa'i 'od ces bya ba, vimAlaprabhAnAmamUlatantrAnusAriNIdvAdazasAhasrikAlaghukAlacakratantrarAjaTIkA), Peking 2064, vol. 46; Vajragarbha's (rdo rje snying po) Commentary on the Condensation of the Hevajra Tantra (kye'i rdo rje bsdus pa'i don gyi rgya cher 'grel pa, hevajrapiNDArthaTIkA), Peking 2310, vol. 53; and VajrapANi's (phyag na rdo rje) Meaning Commentary on the CakrasaMvara Tantra. The latter two commentaries are done in the manner of the KAlachakra Tantra, that is to say, through the grid of the teachings in the KAlachakra.
སེམས-ཙམ-པ	Comment: They are called "Proponents of Mind-Only" because they propound that the three realms — Desire Realm, Form Realm, and Formless Realm — are truly established as only mind.
སེམས-ལས-བྱུང	see: {སེམས་བྱུང}
སེམས-ལས-བྱུང-བ	see: {སེམས་བྱུང}
སེམས-བསྐྱེད-པ-རྣམ-པར-གཏན-ལ-དབབ-པ	should Eng be "ascertain" for "settle"? (SW)
སེམས-པའི-ཟས	one of the four foods; for others see: {ཟས}
སེམས-ཀྱི-ཟས	one of the four sustenances; for others see: {ཟས}
སེམས-བྱུང-ཀུན-འགྲོ	see: {ཀུན་འགྲོ}
སེམས-དཔའི-སྐྱིལ-ཀྲུང	Comment: this posture is also called the half-vajra posture (rdo rje skyil mo krung phyed)
སེམས-དཔའི-སྐྱིལ-མོ-ཀྲུང	Comment: this posture is also called the half-vajra posture (rdo rje skyil mo krung phyed).
སེམས-དང-ལྡན-པ-སུ-ཞིག-སྨྲ	a way of strongly disagreeing with a certain position
སེམས-འདི-བཟང-བ-མིན-སྙམ	Others' english—sic. Seems strange (T)
སེར-པོ	one of the four primary colors (rtsa ba'i kha dog); the others are: white (dkar po); red (dmar po); and blue (sngon po)
སེར-སྣ	mAtsarya; miserliness; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) mAtsarya (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) non-introspection (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
སེར-སྣ-མངོན-གྱུར-སྐྱཻ-བའི-གོ-སྐབས	Entry said "dkye ba" instead of "skye ba" (T)
སྒེག-མོ	get ex from Dor/Lag' get list of 8 offering goddesses; create records if they don't already exist; copy this comment to each of the other 7Comment: one of the eight offering goddesses, the others being
སྒེག-རྡོར	Comment: Important Indian figure in MahAyoga and Yoga Tantra lineages. Author of the famous B#ar-kap (spar khab) commentary on the Guhyagarbha Tantra.
སྒེག-པའི-རྡོ-རྗ	Comment: Important Indian figure in MahAyoga and Yoga Tantra lineages. Author of the famous B#ar-kap (spar khab) commentary on the Guhyagarbha Tantra.
སྒེག-མོ-མ	ck trans in: 1. Tshig; 2. further in Dor to see how Bu explains it. Get ex from Dor/Lag' get list of 8 offering goddesses; create records if they don't already exist; copy this comment to each of the other 7Comment: one of the eight offering goddesses, the others being
སྒོ-ང-ཕྱེད-ཚལ-པ	Comment: This is a school of True Aspectarians (rnam bden pa, satyAkAravAdin) within the Mind-Only School. check JYS for SUtra School
སྒོམ-ལམ	path of meditation; Comment: This is one of the five paths (lam): path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
སྒོམ-རིམ	Comment: These are three texts on similar material.
སྒོམ-པའི-རིམ-པ	Comment: These are three texts on similar material.
སྒྲ	Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external matter (phyi'i bem po): form (gzugs); sound (sgra); smell (dri); taste (ro); tangible object (reg bya). Assertions on sounds assume considerable importance in Buddhist tenet systems since they provide an avenue for discounting non-Buddhist assertions that the sounds of the Vedas are eternally authoritative. Buddhist systems emphasize that sounds do not of their accord express their meanings but are arbitrary conventions.
སྒྲ-བཤད	etymology; Comment: This type of etymology is usually done without adding (bsnan), changing (phyis), or deleting (phyis) letters as is often done in a creative etymology (nges tshig).
སྒྲ-གཅན	Comment: The ascending eclipse node, that is the point where the moon intercepts the eclipitic in passing northwards, a.k.a. the northern node; the head of the demon Sainhikeya who swallows the moon and sun. RAhu is all head with no body.
སྒྲ-རྟག-གམ-མི-རྟག-སྙམ-པའི-ཐེ-ཚོམ	Comment: This is an illustration of equal doubt (cha mnyam [snyoms] pa'i the tshom).
སྒྲ-རྟག-གམ-སྙམ-པའི-ཐེ-ཚོམ	Comment: This is an illustration of doubt not tending toward the fact (don mi 'gyur kyi the tshom).
སྒྲ-རྟག-འཛིན-རྟོག-པ	Comment: This is an illustration of a mistaken conceptual consciousness ('khrul ba'i rtog pa).
སྒྲ-འཛིན-དབང-མངོན	Comment: This is one of the five divisions of sense direct perceptions (dbang mngon); the others correspond to the other senses.
སྒྲ-མི-སྙན	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology this name is used for he northern continent as well as for one of the two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) that are next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
སྒྲ-མི-སྙན-གྱི-ཟླ	Comment: This is one of the eight smaller continents of Buddhist cosmology (gling phran brgyad) that, two each, are next to four large continents: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
སྒྲ-མི-རྟག-གམ-སྙམ-པའི-ཐེ-ཚོམ	Comment: This is instance of doubt tending toward the fact (don 'gyur kyi the tshom).
སྒྲ-མི-རྟག-རྟོགས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-དཔག-སྐད-གཅིག-གཉིས-པ	Comment: This is an illustration of a conceptual subequent cognition induced by an inference (rjes dpag gis drangs pa'i rtog pa bcad shes).
སྒྲ-མི-རྟག-ཅེས-པའི-ངག-ཙམ-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-སྒྲ-མི-རྟག-པར-འཛིན-པའི-བློ	Comment: This is instance of correct assumption lacking a reason (rgyu mtshan med pa'i yid dpyod).
སྒྲ-རྟོག-གིས-བཏགས-ཙམ-མ-ཡིན-པར-རང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད-གྱིས-གྲུབ-པའི-ཆོས	Comment: This is the definition of specifically characterized phenonenon (rang mtshan). There are multiple uses of such terms. For instance, consciousness (shes pa) is a specifically characterized phenonenon (rang mtshan); that which is luminous and knowing (gsal zhing rig pa) is its specific character (rang gi mtshan nyid); impermance (mi rtag) is a general character (spyi'i mtshan nyid) of consciousness shared with other products. An instance of a generally characterized phenomenon (spyi mtshan) is uncompounded space. Ge-luk-b#a scholars also identify "own-character" as referring either to objects' establishment by way of their own character (rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or to establishment by way of their own character as the referents of conceptual consciousnesses (rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or both.
སྒྲ-རྟོག-གིས-བཏགས-ཙམ-མ-ཡིན-པར-ཡུལ-རང-གི-ཐུན-མོང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-སྡོད-ལུགས-ཀྱི-ངོས-ནས-གྲུབ-པ	Comment: This is the definition of specifically characterized phenonenon (rang mtshan). There are multiple uses of such terms. For instance, consciousness (shes pa) is a specifically characterized phenonenon (rang mtshan); that which is luminous and knowing (gsal zhing rig pa) is its specific character (rang gi mtshan nyid); impermance (mi rtag) is a general character (spyi'i mtshan nyid) of consciousness shared with other products. An instance of a generally characterized phenomenon (spyi mtshan) is uncompounded space. Ge-luk-b#a scholars also identify "own-character" as referring either to objects' establishment by way of their own character (rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or to establishment by way of their own character as the referents of conceptual consciousnesses (rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or both.
སྒྲ-རྟོག-གིས-བཏགས-པ-ཙམ-ཡིན-གྱི-རང-མཚན-དུ-མ-གྲུབ-པའི-ཆོས	Comment: This is the definition of spyi mtshan (generally characterized phenomenon). There are multiple uses of such terms. For instance, consciousness (shes pa) is a specifically characterized phenonenon (rang mtshan); that which is luminous and knowing (gsal zhing rig pa) is its specific character (rang gi mtshan nyid); impermance (mi rtag) is a general character (spyi'i mtshan nyid) of consciousness shared with other products. An instance of a generally characterized phenomenon (spyi mtshan) is uncompounded space. Ge-luk-b#a scholars also identify "own-character" as referring either to objects' establishment by way of their own character (rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or to establishment by way of their own character as the referents of conceptual consciousnesses (rang 'dzin rtog pa'i zhen gzhir rang gi mtshan nyid kyis grub pa) or both.
སྒྲ-སྤྱི-ཁོ-ན-འཛིན-པའི-རྟོག-པ	Comment: An instance is a conceptual consciousness apprehending pot, which is produced from merely hearing the sound "pot," in the continuum of a being who does not know that a bulbous, flat-bottomed thing which is able to perform the function of holding water is a pot (lto ldir zhabs zhums chu skyor gyi don byed nus pa bum pa yin par mi shes pa'i skyes bu'i rgyud kyi bum pa zhes pa'i sgra tsam la brten nas skyes pa'i bum 'dzin rtog pa).
སྒྲ-བྱས-པ-དང-བྱས-ན-མི-རྟག-པས-ཁྱབ-པ-ཚད-མས-མ-ངེས-པར-བྱས-རྟགས-ལས-སྒྲ-མི-རྟག-པར-འཛིན-པའི-བློ	Comment: This is an instance of a correctly assuming consciousness for which, although there is a reason, the reason has not be ascertained (rgyu mtshan yod kyang gtan la ma phebs pa'i yid dpyod).\nCheck English and comment (T)
སྒྲ-ཉམ-ང-བ-མེད-པ	Check entry, why the first one without sgra? (T)
སྒྲ-རིག-པ	Comment: One of the five lesser sciences (rig gnas chung ba lnga): healing or medicine (gso ba); grammar (sgra rig pa); epistemology (tshad ma); reasoning (gdan tshig); arts (bzo ba). check these in 3 vol. dic and make entries for each along with five great sciences. These are from Das and seem wrong
སྒྲ-དོན-འདྲེས-རུང-དུ-འཛིན-པའི-ཞེན-རིག	Comment: This is the definition of conceptual consciousness (rtog pa).
སྒྲ-དོན-འདྲེས-རུང-དུ-འཛིན-པའི-ཞེན-རིག-དང-བྲལ-བའི-རིག-པ	Comment: This is the definition of non-conceptual consciousness (rtog med kyi shes pa).
སྒྲའི-ལྷ	sound deity; Comment: This is the second of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
སྒྲའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	sound sense-sphere; Comment: This is one of the five divisions of external form (phyi'i gzugs): form sense-sphere (gzugs kyi skye mched); (2) sound sense-sphere (sgra'i skye mched); (3) odor sense-sphere (dri'i skye mched); (4) taste sense-sphere (ro'i skye mched); (5) tangible object sense-sphere (reg bya'i skye mched).
སྒྲའི-ཡུལ-མ-ཡིན	get this from Anne's work and make entries. (GD:119) One of DharmakIrti's four criterion for specifically characterized phenomena the others are: (1) having the power to produce effects (don byed nus pa), (2) being specific (mi 'dra ba), (4) apprehensible without reliance on other factors (rgyu mtshan ?????????)
སྒྲས-བརྗོད-རིགས-ཀྱི-སྒོ-ནས-དབྱེ-བ	Comment: Not an actual division.
སྒྲིབ-པ-ནང-ན-ཡོད-པ	those whose obstruction is internal; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of hungry ghost (yi dwags, preta): those whose obstruction is external (sgrib pa phyi na yod pa); those whose obstruction is internal (sgrib pa nang na yod pa); those whose obstructions are both external and internal (sgrib pa phyi nang gnyis ka yod pa).
སྒྲིབ-པ-ནང-ན-ཡོད-པའི-ཡི-དྭགས	Comment: This is one of the three divisions of hungry ghost (yi dwags, preta): those whose obstruction is external (sgrib pa phyi na yod pa); those whose obstruction is internal (sgrib pa nang na yod pa); those whose obstructions are both external and internal (sgrib pa phyi nang gnyis ka yod pa).
སྒྲིབ-པ-ཕྱི-ན-ཡོད-པ	those whose obstruction is external; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of hungry ghost (yi dwags, preta): those whose obstruction is external (sgrib pa phyi na yod pa); those whose obstruction is internal (sgrib pa nang na yod pa); those whose obstructions are both external and internal (sgrib pa phyi nang gnyis ka yod pa).
སྒྲིབ-པ-ཕྱི-ན-ཡོད-པའི-ཡི-དྭགས	Comment: This is one of the three divisions of hungry ghost (yi dwags, preta): those whose obstruction is external (sgrib pa phyi na yod pa); those whose obstruction is internal (sgrib pa nang na yod pa); those whose obstructions are both external and internal (sgrib pa phyi nang gnyis ka yod pa).
སྒྲིབ-པ-ཕྱི-ནང-གཉིས-ཀ-ཡོད-པ	those whose obstructions are both external and internal; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of hungry ghost (yi dwags, preta): those whose obstruction is external (sgrib pa phyi na yod pa); those whose obstruction is internal (sgrib pa nang na yod pa); those whose obstructions are both external and internal (sgrib pa phyi nang gnyis ka yod pa).
སྒྲིབ-པ-ཕྱི-ནང-གཉིས-ཀ-ཡོད-པའི-ཡི-དྭགས	Comment: This is one of the three divisions of hungry ghost (yi dwags, preta): those whose obstruction is external (sgrib pa phyi na yod pa); those whose obstruction is internal (sgrib pa nang na yod pa); those whose obstructions are both external and internal (sgrib pa phyi nang gnyis ka yod pa).
སྒྲིབ-གཉིས-ཟད-པར-སྤངས-པའི-མཐར-ཐུག-གི-མཁྱེན-པ	Comment: This is the definition of MahAyAna path of no more learning (theg chen gyi mi slob lam).
སྒྲོ-བཏགས	Comment: For a definition, see sgro 'dogs.
སྒྲོལ	Comment: This is the transitive form; grol is intransitive form.
སྒྲུབ-འཇུག	Comment: For a definition of person who is a collective/complete/holistic engager, see sgrub 'jug gi blo.
སྒྲུབ-པར-གྱུར-པའི-ལྡོག-པ-རིགས-གཅིག-པ	check Dan
སྒྲུབ-འཇུག-གི-གང-ཟག	Comment: This is one of the two types of sgrub 'jug according to Jay-d#zün-b#a, the other being non-conceptual prime/valid cognition (rtog med kyi tshad ma).
སྒྲུབ-པ-དོན-དམ	Comment: This is one of the three meanings of ultimate (don dam, paramArtha) according to Matireya's Differentiation of the Middle and Extremes (III.11ab): object-ultimate (don don dam, i.e., thusness); attainment-ultimate (thob pa don dam, i.e., nirvANa); and practice-ultimate (sgrub pa don dam, true paths). BJ calls them terminological divisions, not actual divisions.
སྒྱིད-ལུགས-པའི-ལེ-ལོ	Comment: This is one of three types of laziness: laziness of inadequacy (sgyid lug pa'i le lo); laziness which is an attachment to bad activities (bya ba ngan zhen gyi le lo); laziness of neutral activities (snyoms las kyi le lo). sgyid means "affinity," and lugs means "discard"; see Calm Abiding, p. 71.
སྒྱུ-ལུས	illusory body; Comment: This is the fourth of the six stages of the completion stage in the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tanta: physical isolation (lus dben), verbal isolation (ngag dben), mental isolation (sems dben), illusory body (sgyus lus), clear light ('od gsal), union (zung 'jug).
སྒྱུ-འཕྲུལ-དྲ-བ	get P # and vol #
སྒྱུ-འཕྲུལ-དྲྭ-བ	get P # and vol #
ཤཱ-ཀྱ	name of the Buddha's clan SW changed Tibetan entry from bz-W- to b_/-W-,
ཤཱ-རིའི-བུ	SW changed Tibetan entry from sha' kya to shA kya,
ཤཱ-ཀྱ-ཐུབ-པ	SW changed Tibetan entry from bz-W- to b_/-W-,
ཤཱ-ཀྱ-བཤེས-གཉེན	ShAkyamitra; Comment: Three Indian scholars are renowned especially for their works on Yoga Tantra, whom New Translation Schools consider the "Three People Expert/Proficient in Yoga [Tantra]" (yoga la mi mkhas pa gsum): Buddhaguhya (sangs rgyas gsang ba; fl. mid eighth century), ShAkyamitra (shA kya bshes gnyen), and A#nandagarbha (kun dga' snying po; fl. late ninth or early tenth century).
ཤ-ཀྱ	shA kya; name of SiddhArtha's clan (T) SW: add: misspelling of 'shA kya'?
ཤ-ཀྱ-ཐུབ-པ	shA kya thub pa; SW: add: misspelling of 'shA kya thub pa'?
ཤ-ཀྱ-ཐུབ-པ-ཆེན-པོ	shA kya thub pa chen po; SW: add: misspelling of 'shA kya thub pa chen po'?
ཤ-ཀྱའི-སྲས-པོ-མ-ཡིན	shA kya'i sras po ma yin; SW: add: misspelling of 'shA kya'i sras po ma yin'?
ཤད	a shay often, but not always, marks the end of a phrase, sentence, line of poetry, etc.
ཤམ-ཐབས	skirt; SW changed Eng from "undergarments" to "lower garment", since sham thabs means the skirt (at least in colloquial Tibetan)
ཤར-ལུས-འཕགས-པོ	Comment: In Buddhist cosmology there are four large continents, each of which has two smaller continents (gling phran brgyad) next to it: In the center, is the monarch of mountains, ri rab (meru). The four continents and eight smaller continents are (1) shar lus 'phags po (videha), the eastern continent "land of [those with] superior/large bodies" with lus (deha) and lus 'phags (videha); (2) lho 'dzam bu gling (jambudvIpa), the southern continent "Jambu-tree land" with rnga yab (cAmara) and rnga yab gzhan (aparacAmara); (3) nub ba blang spyod (godanIya) the western continent "land of using cattle" with g.yo ldan (sAthA) and lam mchog 'gro (uttaramantriNa); (4) byang sgra mi snyan (kuru), the northern continent "land of unpleasant sound" with sgra mi snyan (kurava) and sgra mi snyan kyi zla (kaurava). Surrounding all of these is an outer rim of iron mountains.
ཤེས	According to the grammar verse, "shes" is not used as a quote marker, so it wouldn't be confused with this shes (T); (PH) delete sense and example 2 ??
ཤེས-བྱ	Comment: Illustrations are (1) pot (bum pa); (2) uncompounded space ('dus ma byas kyi nam mkha'); (3) the two, pillar and pot (ka bum gnyis); (4) the two, permanent phenomenon and [functioning] thing (rtag dngos gnyis).
ཤེས-པ	example: eye consciousness (mig shes)
ཤེས-རབ	one of the five determining mental factors (yul nges lnga, viSaya-pratiniyama); for others see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
ཤེས-སྒྲིབ	one of the two types of obstructions abandoned by Bodhisattvas on the path to enlightenment; the other type is: the afflictive obstructions (nyon mongs sgrib, klezAvaraNa)
ཤེས-རྣམ-སྒོམ-པ	meditative cultivation of the aspect of a subject [e.g., meditatively cultivating compassion]; Comment: There are two types of meditation, meditation on the aspect of an object [e.g., meditating on impermanence] (don rnam sgom pa) and meditative cultivation of the aspect of a subject [e.g., meditatively cultivating compassion] (shes rnam sgom pa). The first means to meditate on an object, and the second means to meditatively cultivate a consciousness, an attitude.
ཤེས-པ-ཚད-མ	illustrations are: direct perceivers and inferential cognizers (mngon sum dang rjes dpag)
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	the tenth of the ten perfections; see: {ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ}; sometimes abbreviated as {ཕར་ཕྱིན}
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ-བརྒྱད-སྟོང-པའི-བཤད-པ-མངོན-པར-རྟོགས-པའི-རྒྱན-གྱི-སྣང-བ	English originally said: Great Commentary on the Eight Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom SUtra, by Haribhadra's ... (T)
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ-གཉིས-སྟོང-ལྔ-བརྒྱ-པ-རབ-ཀྱི-ཚལ-གྱིས-རྣམ-པར-གནོན-པས-ཞུས-པ	Entry did say "rgya" instead of "brgya", Also should add "Questions of Suvikranta-vikramin" ??? (T)
ཤེས-རབ-འབྱུང-གནས-བློ-གྲོས	Comment: author of the Commentary on the Difficult Points of Engaging in the Bodhisattva Deeds (BodhicaryAvatAra-paJjikA, Byang chub kyi spyod pa la 'jug pa'i dka' 'grel), P. 5273, vol. 100
ཤེས-བཞིན-མ-ཡིན-པ	asaMprajanya; non-introspection; Comment: This is one of the twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyon nyi shu, upakleza): (1) belligerence (khro ba, krodha); (2) resentment ('khon 'dzin, upanAha); (3) concealment ('chab pa, mrakSa); (4) spite ('tshig pa, pradAsa); (5) jealousy (IrSyA); (6) miserliness (mAtsarya); (7) deceit (sgyu, mAyA); (8) dissimulation (g.yo, zAThya); (9) haughtiness (rgyags pa, mada); (10) harmfulness (rnam par 'tshe ba, vihiMsA); (11) non-shame (ngo tsha med pa, AhrIkya); (12) non-embarrassment (khrel med, anapatrApya); (13) lethargy (rmugs pa, styAna); (14) excitement (rgod pa, auddhatya); (15) non-faith (ma dad pa, Azraddhya); (16) laziness (le lo, kausIdya); (17) non-conscientiousness (bag med pa, pramAda); (18) forgetfulness (brjed nges pa, muSita-smRtitA); (19) asaMprajanya (shes bzhin ma yin pa, asaMprajanya); (20) distraction (rnam par g/yeng pa, vikSepya).
ཤེས-བཞིན-མེད-པ	see: {ཤེས་བཞིན་མ་ཡིན་པ}
ཤེས-བྱ-བ	I question whether "shes" can be used as a quote marker, as mentioned above (T)
ཤེས-པའི-ཀུན-རྫོབ	mental conventionalities; Comment: This is one of three divisions of conventionalities: (1) imputational conventionalities (btags pa'i kun rdzob); (2) mental conventionalities (shes pa'i kun rdzob); (3) verbal conventionalities (brjod pa'i kun rdzob). Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso also identifies "imputational conventionalities" as imputational natures that are imputed by conceptuality to be truly existent whereas they are not truly existent; "mental conventionalities" as other-powered natures, which are illustrated by "unreal ideation" (yang dag pa ma yin pa'i kun rtog) since it is the principal other-powered nature, and thus come to be called "mental"; "verbal conventionalities" as thoroughly established natures which, although they ultimately cannot be taken as objects by way of terms and conceptual consciousnesses, are suitable to be expressed through many verbal forms such as thusness and so forth.
ཤིག-པ-རྗེས-ལ	see: {ཤིག}
ཤིགས	see: {ཤིག}
ཤིན-ལྐོག	shin tu lkog gyur; see: {ཤིན་ཏུ་ལྐོག་གྱུར}
ཤིན-སྦྱངས	shin tu sbyangs pa; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
ཤིན-ཏུ-ཉེ-བར-གནས-པ	Sanskrit did say "sUpastita" (T)
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྦྱང-དཀའ-བ	fifth of the ten Bodhisattva grounds; for others see: {བྱང་སེམས་འཕགས་པའི་ས}
ཤིན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པ	Comment: the One Hundred Thousand Stanza Perfection of Wisdom SUtra, or the Perfection of Wisdom SUtras, in general. (PH) note added from EMO p.236 fn.b Check
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྤྱངས-པ	see: {ཤིན་སྦྱངས}
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྦྱངས-པ	pliancy; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) non-hatred (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA).
ཤིན-ཏུ-ལྐོག-གྱུར	compare: {ལྐོག་གྱུར}; {ཅུང་ཟད་ལྐོག་གྱུར}
ཤིང-རྟ	chariot; Is "opener of the chariot way" a translation of just shing rta ?? (T)
ཤིང-རྟའི-སྲོལ-འབྱེད	see: {ཤིང་རྟ}
ཤིས-ལུགས	(PH) too many synonyms
ཤིས-པ	SW added this record
སྐབས-འདིར-བསྟན-གྱི-ཡིད-མངོན	Comment: There are three assertions concerning mental direct perceptions indicated on this occasion (skabs 'dir bstan gyi yid mngon): rgyun mtha' kho nar skye ba (production only at the end of a continuum); spel mar skye ba (alternating production); and 'gros gsum par skye ba (production in three types).
སྐབས-མཆིས-པ	skabs mchis; Comment: Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso (Port of Entry, 290.2) explains that "affords an occasion" (skabs mchis pa) means "suitable for the assessment of censure" (klan ka 'jug rung).
སྐད-དོད	Comment: Often used to refer to the Sanskrit original of a Tibetan term or to the Tibetan translation equivalent of a Sanskrit term.
སྐད-ཅིག-མ	Comment: That which is momentary (skad cig ma) is the definition of impermanent phenomenon (mi rtag pa).
སྐལ-མཉམ-གྱི-རྒྱུ	Comment: One of the six kinds of causes; for others see rgyu.
སྐྲན	Comment: see also gnyan
སྐྱེ-དགུ	Comment: A possible etymology is that there are nine levels of beings in cyclic existence, and thus "nine-creatures" comes to mean all beings in cyclic existence.
སྐྱེ-གནས	Comment: There are four birth-places: womb, egg, heat and moisture, and spontaneous.
སྐྱེ-མཆེད	Comment: That which opens, or increases, the production of consciousness.
སྐྱེ-དགག-གནས-གསུམ-མི-རུང-བའི-ཆོས	Comment: Definition of uncompounded phenomenon ('dus ma byas kyi chos).
སྐྱེ-དགག-གནས-གསུམ-རུང-བའི-ཆོས	Comment: Definition of compounded phenomenon ('dus byas kyi chos).
སྐྱེ-བའི-སྤྲུལ-སྐུ	I think this is wrong?? check MED
སྐྱེ-བ-དོན-མེད-པ	Comment: Buddhists accuse the SAMkhyas of purposeless production when the SAMkhyas assert the production (or manifestation) of what is already produced (or already exists in an unmanifest state).
སྐྱེ-བ-ལ-དོན-མེད-པ	Comment: Buddhists accuse the SAMkhyas of purposeless production when the SAMkhyas assert the production (or manifestation) of what is already produced (or already exists in an unmanifest state).
སྐྱེ-བ-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ	utpattiniHsvabhAvatA; Comment: This is one of the three non-natures: character-non-nature (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); production-non-nature (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); ultimate-non-nature (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).
སྐྱེ-བ-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ-ཉིད	utpattiniHsvabhAvatA; Comment: This is one of the three non-natures: character-non-nature (mtshan nyid ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); production-non-nature (skye ba ngo bo nyid med pa, utpattiniHsvabhAvatA); ultimate-non-nature (don dam pa ngo bo nyid med pa, paramArthaniHsvabhAvatA).
སྐྱེ-བ-མེད-པའི-ཆོས-ལ-བཟོད-པ	Comment: A-ku L#o-drö-gya-tso (Precious Lamp, 223.2) takes this as referring to attaining forbearance, that is, facility, with respect to the meaning of the selflessness of phenomena. Jik-may-dam-chö-gya-tso (Port of Entry, 505.6) adds that through ascertaining the meaning of the non-production of phenomena upon taking the eight non-productions as reasons, one attains forbearance with respect to the doctrine of non-production, that is, selflessness.
སྐྱེ-མཆེད-དྲུག	Comment: see skye mched.
སྐྱེ-མེད-གནས-ལ	in the state of non-production; Comment: As in having faith in the state of non-production.
སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: That which produces is the definition of cause (rgyu).
སྐྱེས-བུ	puruSa; Comment: puruSa is etymologized as one who has capacity (nus ldan).
སྐྱེས-པ	Comment: That which is created is the definition of product (byas pa).
སྐྱེས-བུ-ཚད-མ	Comment: For example, the Teacher Buddha (ston pa sangs rgyas).
སྐྱེས-བུས-བྱེད-པའི-འབྲས-བུ	Comment: One of the five types of effects; for example, a harvest achieved through the exertions of a farmer (zhing pas rtson pas sgrub pa'i lo tog); for other effects see 'bras bu.
སྐྱེས-བུའི-ཤེས-རྒྱུད-ཀྱིས-མ-བསྡུས-པའི-གཟུགས	Comment: This is the definition of external form (phyi'i gzugs).
སྐྱེས-བུའི-ཤེས-རྒྱུད-ཀྱིས-བསྡུས-པའི-གཟུགས	Comment: This is the definition of internal form (nang gi gzugs).
སྐྱེས-བུའི-རྒྱུད-ཀྱིས-མ-བསྡུས-པའི-རྡུལ-དུ-གྲུབ-པ	Comment: This is the definition of external matter (phyi'i bem po), which is one of two divisions of matter (bem po, kanthA); the other is internal matter (nang gi bem po). There are five divisions of external matter (phyi'i bem po): form (gzugs); sound (sgra); smell (dri); taste (ro); tangible object (reg bya).
སྐྱེས-བུའི-རྒྱུད-ཀྱིས-བསྡུས-པའི-རྡུལ-དུ-གྲུབ-པ	Comment: This is the definition of internal matter (nang gi bem po).
སྐྱུ-རུ-ར	Comment: The term is used for a sour medicinal fruit, Emblica officinalis Linn., said to cure diseases of phlegm, bile, and blood. It is used to indicate something that is perfectly clear in front of the eyes.
སླད-དུ	SW added Eng. & ex.
སླད-ནས	get ex from colophon to Catuhpiitha text Derge KG rgyud 'bum lnga pa p. 607 (I wrote colophon on a piece of paper) SW added this record
སླད-རོལ-པ	see: {མུ་སྟེགས་ཅན}
སློབ-བརྒྱུད	SW added this record
སྨད-བྱུང	see: {རྨད་དུ་བྱུང་བ}
སྨད-དུ-བྱུང	see: {རྨད་དུ་བྱུང}
སྨན-པའི-མཆོག	an epithet of Buddha
སྨན-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-བླ-མེད	an epithet of Buddha
སྨིན-མཚམས-ཀྱི-མཛོད-སྤུའི-ཕྲག	Comment: one of the X marks/signs of a Buddha.get from mdzod spu entry
སྨྲ-བ-བླ-ན-མེད-པ	(PH) I added parenthetical remarks
སྨྱིག-རྒྱུ	Comment: This is an old form.
སྣ-དབང	one of the five divisions of internal form (nang gi bem po); the other four correspond to the other senses
སྣ-ཤེས	one of the five divisions of sense consciousness (dbang shes); the other four correspond to the other senses
སྣ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-མྱོང-བྱ	definition of scent-source (dri'i skye mched)
སྣ-བའི-དབང-པོ	see sna dbang for definition
སྣ-རྣམ-ཤེས	see sna shes for definition
སྣ-ཚོགས-གཉིས-མེད-པ	Comment: This is a school of True Aspectarians (rnam bden pa, satyAkAravAdin) within the Mind-Only School. check JYS for SUtra School
སྣའི-དབང-པོ	one of the five divisions of internal matter (nang gi bem po); the other four correspond to the other senses; see sna dbang for definition
སྣང-མེད	without appearance; Comment: A non-conceptual consciousness of meditative equipoise is said to be "without appearance" since nothing but an absence appears.
སྣང-ལ-མ-ངེས-པའི-བློ	one of the seven types of knowledge and awareness; for others see: {བློ་རིག}
སྣང-བ-ཉིད-ཀྱང-གཞན-ལས-ངེས-པ	one of the three types of prime cognizer for which ascertainment is induced by another; for others see: gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma; an illustration is: a sense direct perceiver apprehending blue which induces a doubting consciousness that thinks: 'Did I see blue or not?' (kho bos sngon po mthong ngam ma mthong snyam pa'i the tshom 'dren par byed pa'i sngon 'dzin dbang mngon)
སྣང-བ-རང-ལས-ངེས-ཞིང-བདེན-པ-གཞན-ལས-ངེས-པ	one of the three types of direct perceiver that induces ascertainment from another (gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma)
སྣེའུ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.116) identifies this as "chenopodium album" Add?
སྔར	Check Tibetan of first example (T)
སྔར-ཨུཏཔ-ལ-མཐོང-མ-མྱོང-བའི-གང-ཟག-གི-རྒྱུད-ཀྱི-ཨུཏཔ-ལའི-ཁ-དོག-འཛིན-པའི-དབང-མངོན	Comment: This is an example of initial direct perception (mngon sum dang po ba).
སྔོན-པོ	one of the four primary colors (rtsa ba'i kha dog); the other four are: white (dkar po); yellow (ser po); red (dmar po)
སྔོན-འཛིན-དབང-མངོན-གྱིས-དྲངས-པའི-སྔོན-པོ-ངེས-པའི-ཤེས-དོན-མཐུན	an example of conceptual subsequent cognizer that is induced by direct perception (mngon sum gyis drangs pa'i rtog pa bcad shes)
སྔོན-འཛིན-མངོན-སུམ-སྔོན-པོའི-རྣམ-ལྡན-དུ-གཙོ-བོར-དངོས-སུ-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of observed object condition of a direct preception apprehending blue (sngon 'dzin mngon sum gyi dmigs rkyen).
སྔོན-འཛིན-མངོན-སུམ-རང-གི-རྣམ-ལྡན-དུ-གཙོ-བོར-དངོས-སུ-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of observed object condition of a direct preception apprehending blue (sngon 'dzin mngon sum gyi dmigs rkyen).
སྔོན-འཛིན-མངོན-སུམ-རང-དབང-དུ-གཙོ-བོར-དངོས-སུ-སྐྱེད-བྱེད	Comment: This is the definition of an empowering/proprietary condition of a direct perception apprehending blue (sngon 'dzin mngon sum gyi bdag rkyen).
སྔོན-འཛིན-མངོན-སུམ-མྱོང-བ-གསལ-རིག-ཙམ-དུ-གཙོ-བོར-དངོས-སུ-སྐྱེད-བྱེད-ཀྱི-རིག-པ	Comment: This is the definition of an immediately preceding condition of a direct perception apprehending blue (sngon 'dzin mngon sum gyi de ma thag rkyen).
སྔོན-ཆད-སྤྱོད-པའི-ཚེ	Could combine these last three entries. (T)
སྣྲེལ-གཞི	refers to the process of moving from one concentration to another out of sequence
སྣྲེལ-ཞི	this refers to the process of moving from one concentration to another out of sequence\nCheck Entry (T)
སྙན-གཏད	SW added this record
སྙན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-སྒོམ-ལམ-རྣམ-གྲོལ-ལམ	one of the three types of exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a Hearer path of meditation; see nyan thos kyi sgom lam mnyam bzhag ye shes for others]
སྙན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-མཐོང-ལམ-རྣམ-གྲོལ-ལམ	one of the three types of exalted wisdom of meditative equipoise of a Hearer path of seeing; see nyan thos kyi mthong lam mnyam bzhag ye shes for others
སྙིགས-པའི-དུས	snyigs dus; See: {སྙིགས་དུས}
སྙིང-སྟོབས	sattva; Comment: In SAmkhya this is one of the three material qualities (yon tan gsum, triguNa): lightness (snying stobs, sattva), 2) motility (rdul, rajas), 3) darkness (mun pa, tamas). Dzong-ka-ba's Great Exposition of Secret Mantra a passage cites a passage calling the three subtler consciousnesses preceding the mind of clear light according to the GuhyasamAja system sattva, rajas, and tamas.
སྙིང-རྗེའི-བདག-ཉིད	Check. Entry originally had: shin rje'i bdag nyid (T)
སྙིང-རྗེ-ཆེན-པོའི-གཞན-དབང-དུ-གྱུར-པའི-སྒོ-ནས-སེམས-ཅན-གཞན-གྱིས-སངས-རྒྱས-ཐོབ-ཕྱིར-དུ-རྣམ-མཁྱེན-དོན-དུ-གཉེར-བའི-ཆ-ནས-བཞག-པའི-བསམ-པ	definition of path of a being of great capacity (skyes bu chen po'i lam)
སྙིང-རྗེ-རྗེ-ལྟར	Is entry correct? or should it be ji ltar? (T)
སྙོམས-འཇུག-པ	one of the two types of Nihilists
སྙོམས-ལས-ཀྱི-ལེ-ལོ	laziness of neutral activities; Comment: This is one of three types of laziness: laziness of inadequacy (sgyid lug pa'i le lo); laziness which is an attachment to bad activities (bya ba ngan zhen gyi le lo); laziness of neutral activities (snyoms las kyi le lo).
སྙོམས-པར-འཇུག-ལང-བྱེད-ནུས-པ-དང	SW added "absorption" in the English
སོ-བྱ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.181) identifies this as a "Heron" Add?
སོ-སོར-སྐྱེས-བོ	see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
སོ-སོར-རྟོག-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས	one of five types of exalted wisdom—a division of a Great Vehicle path of no more learning (T)
སོ-ཏོ-རོག-པོ	(PH) Clark's _The Quintessence Tantras_ (p.181) identifies your synonym of this term (so bya) as a "Heron" Add?
སོ-སོ-བ	this means conceptually or technically different, as opposed to one (gcig pa)
སོ-སོ-བ-མ-ཡིན-པའི-ཆོས	definition of one (gcig pa)
སོ-སོ-བའི-ཆོས	definition of different (tha dad)
སོའི-སྐྱེ-བོ	see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
སོན	SW added Eng. "cross"
སོང	get ex. from Dor SW added Eng. "occurred"(PH) added from full entry
སོང-བ	SW added Eng. "occurred" see: {སོང}
སོར-བཞག	SW added this record
སྤང-བ	Conze notes later on in the same work in which he translates this as "prevent from ever recurring" that it later changes to mi bskyed pa
སྤང-བྱ-གཅིག-ཆར-བའི-དབང-དུ-བྱས-པ	one of the two types of paths of release of a Hearer's path of meditation; the other is: done in terms of a person who has gradual objects of abandonment (spang bya rim gyis pa'i dbang du byas pa)
སྤང-བྱ-རིམ-གྱིས-པའི-དབང-དུ-བྱས-པ	one of the two types of paths of release of a Hearer's path of meditation; the other is: done in terms of a person who has simultaneous objects of abandonment (spang bya cig char ba'i dbang du byas pa)
སྤང-བྱ-རིམ-གྱིས-པའི-དགྲ-བཅོམ-པའི-མཁྱེན-པ	one of the two types of Hearer path of no more learning (nyan thos kyi mi slob lam); the other is Hearer exalted knower that has gradual objects of abandonment (spang bya cig char ba'i dgra bcom pa'i mkhyen pa )
སྤང-བྱ-ཅིག-ཆར-བའི-དགྲ-བཅོམ-པའི-མཁྱེན-པ	one of the two types of Hearer path of no more learning (nyan thos kyi mi slob lam); the other is Hearer exalted knower that has gradual objects of abandonment (spang bya rim gyis pa'i dgra bcom pa'i mkhyen pa)
སྤེལ	Any Tenses (T)
སྤེལ-མར-སྐྱེ-བ	alternating production; Comment: This is one of the three assertions concerning mental direct perceptions indicated on this occasion (skabs 'dir bstan gyi yid mngon): production only at the end of a continuum (rgyun mtha' kho nar skye ba); alternating production (spel mar skye ba); and production in three types ('gros gsum par skye ba).
སྤོབས-པ-མི-ཆོད-པ	Check entry. Is second alternative a synonym? (T)
སྤོབས-པ-མ-ཚོད-པ	Check entry. Is second alternative a synonym? (T)
སྤྲིན-ལ-ཞོན	Cloud Mount; Comment: also known as indra or zakra. Gung-tang reports that Shakra is called "Cloud Mount" because of being mounted on an elephant that, like a cloud, is very large and moves about gently, with magnificent bearing.
སྤྲོ	need "traM" in Tibetan for example
སྤྲོ-བ	SW added the example & Engl. "be enthusiastic for"
སྤྲོ-ན	get ex from Lag
སྤྱན-རས-གཟིགས-བརྟུལ-ཞུགས	disciple of BhAvaviveka who wrote a Commentary of (BhAvaviveka's) 'Lamp for (NAgArjuna's) "Wisdom"' (shes rab sgron ma'i rgya cher 'grel pa) [P5259, Vol. 96-7]
སྤྱི	Example 1 is irrelevant: phyi instead of spyi (T)
སྤྱི-དོན	the style of textbook which lays out the subject, definitions, divisions, etc. as opposed to analysis of the scope (mtha' dpyad)
སྤྱི-ལྡོག	one of the five types of isolates; for others see: {ལྡོག་པ}
སྤྱི-མཚན	spyi'i mtshan nyid; Comment: This term is used in two markedly different ways, generally characterized phenomenon and general character. Generally characterized phenomena (spyi mtshan) are solely permanent phenomena such as uncompounded space ('dus ma byas kyi nam mkha'). However, general characteristic, or general character, (spyi'i mtshan nyid) refers to a character of an object that is shared with other objects; for instance, impermanence is a general characteristic of consciousness (shes pa) and is also a general characteristic of form (gzugs). Similarly, specifically characterized phenomena (rang mtshan) are solely impermanent phenomena such as consciousness (shes pa) and form (gzugs), but the specific characteristic, or specific character, (rang gi mtshan nyid) of an object is its own definining character such as that which is luminous and knowing (gsal zhing rig pa), which is the definition of consciousness (shes pa), an impermanent phenomena; and the non-affirming negative which is a mere negation of obstructive contact (thogs reg bkag tsam gyi med dgag), which is the definition of uncompounded space, a permanent phenomena.
སྤྱི-ཁོ-ན	Illustration: existent (yod pa)
སྤྱིའི-མཚན-ཉིད	see: {སྤྱི་མཚན}
སྤྱིར-དོན-སྤྱི	one of the two types of meaning generalities
སྤྱོད-རྒྱུད	Performance Tantra; Comment: This is the second of the four divisions of the tantras in the New Schools of Tibetan Buddhism and some Indian sources: (1) Action Tantra (bya rgyud, kriyAtantra), (2) Performance Tantra (spyod rgyud, caryAtantra), (3) Yoga Tantra (rnal 'byor rgyud, yogatantra), and (4) Highest Yoga Tantra (bla med kyi rgyud, anuttarayogatantra).
སྲ-ཞིང-འཐས-པ	definition of earth (sa)
སྲིད-རྩེ	highest level of the three realms; fourth of the four formless absorptions (gzugs med snyoms 'jug, arUpya-samApatti); for others see: {གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམས་འཇུག}
སྲིད-པའི-ཡན-ལག-གི-བག-ཆགས	bhavAGgavAsanA; predispositions of the branches of cyclic existence; Comment: There are four types of predispositions in Ge-luk-b#a explanations of Mind-Only (sems tsam): predispositions of [perceptions of] similar type (rigs mthun gyi bag chags); predispositions of verbalization (mngon brjod kyi bag chags, abhilApavAsanA); predispositions of the view of self (bdag lta'i bag chags, AtmadRStivAsanA); bhavAGgavAsanA (srid pa'i yan lag gi bag chags, bhavAGgavAsanA.
སྲིད-པའི-རྩེ-མོ	the highest level within the three realms; fourth of the four formless absorptions (gzugs med snyoms 'jug, arUpya-samApatti); for others see: {གཟུགས་མེད་སྙོམས་འཇུག}
སྲིན-མཛུབ	get ex from Dor
སྲིན-པོ	ck Tshig; ck spelling, definition in M-W; add female form to "srin mo" record; from Dor III 32b/ 238 SW added this record
སྲོག-རྩོལ	a form of tantric meditation
སྲོལ	Tibetan of ex. 2 originally said: ... grub ma mtha'i srol ... (T)
སྲོལ-གཏོད	SW added this record
སྲོང	SW added this entry
སྲུང-བ-མ	Comment: One of the eighteen VaibhASika Schools, according to some renditions; see Meditation on Emptiness, pp. 717-718.
སྟ-གོན	SW added this record; Sanskrit of sta gon?; ck Eng. tr.
སྟེན	Tenses were originally: bsten / sden / bstend / sten (T)
སྟེང-དུ	SW added last Eng "in relation to" {ཕ༹ྲོམ་Sཨ་ལམ་ཏེxཏ}
སྟེང-ནས	Check Ex 1 English (T)
སྟོན-པ-སངས-རྒྱས	example of valid being (skyes bu tshad ma)
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-ཀྱི-ལྷ	emptiness deity; Comment: This is the first of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-སྨོས-པའི-རྣམ-པས	(PH) take out of instrumental case?
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-ལས-ཀྱང-གཟུགས-གཞན-མ-ཡིན-ཏེ-གཟུགས-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-གཟུགས-སོ	Could go as an example of stong pa nyid. (T)
སྟོང-ཉིད-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-རྟོགས-པའི-ཤེས-རབ-དང-སྙིང-རྗེ-ཆེན-པོས-ཟིན-པའི-བྱང-འཕགས-ཀྱི-མཁྱེན-པ	definition of ground of a Bodhisattva Superior (byang sems 'phags pa'i sa)
སྟོང-ཉིད-བདུན-ཅུ-པ	one of the "Six Collections of Reasonings" (rigs tshogs drug); see rigs tshogs drug for others
ཏ-ཐཱ-ག-ཏ	tathAgata; SW changed the entry to "tathAgata" from "tathagata".
ཐ-དད	Comment: Difference can refer merely to nominal difference, such as the difference between bum pa and pot; Examples of different phenomena are (1) the two, permanent and functioning thing (rtags dngos gnyis); these are mutually exclusive ('gal ba) and a dichotomy; (2) the two, object of knowledge and existent (shes bya dang yod pa gnyis); these are equivalent (don gcig) but not one (gcig); (3) the two, pillar and pot (ka bum gnyis); (4) the two, pot and the impermanence of pot (bum pa dang bum pa steng gi mi rtag pa gnyis); these are one entity but different isolates (ngo bo gcig la ldog pa tha dad).
ཐ-མལ-པའི-སེམས	Comment: Metaphor used in the N#ying-ma Order for an accomplished yogi's experience of fundamental mind, suggesting the at-homeness of the fundamental innate mind of clear light when experienced by one who has overcome the initial, distorted fear and sense of annihilation.
ཐ-གུའི-ལྟོ	Garlanded Belly; Comment: also known as viSNu. Gung-tang reports that during his youth ViShNu wore a garland of flowers around his waist and that according to one story his wife wanted to put a garland of flowers around his head, but the garland reached only his waist, this being why he is called "Garlanded Belly."
ཐབས	Comment: Gung-tang makes an important distinction between thabs (upAya) as compassion and thabs (upAya) as skillful means used to lead trainees by way of various techniques; he speaks from a tradition that distinguishes these two. It appears that in many Great Vehicle traditions, especially in East Asia, the two are conflated.
ཐབས-ཀྱི-ཚུལ	many modes of skillful means; Comment: Gung-tang identifies the "many modes of skillful means" as Buddha's temporarily teaching merely a coarse form of selflessness.
ཐལ-ལྕག	SW added this record
ཐལ-རང	the two types of proponents of the Middle Way School (mAdhyamika)\nI added English to English (T)
ཐལ-འགྱུར-བ	a proponent of the Middle Way Consequence (prAsaGgika-madhyamaka) school, one of the two main schools of the Middle Way school
ཐལ-འགྱུར-ཡང-དག	one of the two types of consequences (thal 'gyur); the other is facsimile of a consequence (thal 'gyur ltar snang)\nNeed English for definition (T)
ཐལ-འགྱུར-ཡང-དག-གང-ཞིག-བཟློག-དོན-ཚུལ-གསུམ-ཚང-བ	definition of correct consequence that impels a proof (sgrub byed 'phen pa'i thal 'gyur yang dag)\nCheck English (T)
ཐལ-འགྱུར-དུ-བཀོད-པ	Comment: This is the definition of a consequence (thal 'gyur).
ཐལ-འགྱུར-ལྟར-སྣང	Comment: This is one of the two types of consequence (thal 'gyur); the other is correct consequence (thal 'gyur yang dag).
ཐམས-ཅད-ཡོད-པར-སྨྲ-བ	a school of Buddhism that asserted the existence of real dharmas
ཐམས-ཅད-པ-རྣམ-པར-སྣང-མཛད-པ	Check entry. Is this the same as rnam par snang mdzad ? (T)
ཐང	(PH) added dynasty dates
ཐར-ལམ-གསལ-བྱེད	Gyel-tsap's commentary on DharmakIrti's Commentary on (DignAga's) Compendium of Valid Cognition (pramANavArttika)
ཐེ-ཚོམ	doubt; Comment: This is one of the six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUlakleza): desire ('dod chogs, rAga); (2) anger (khong khro, pratigha); (3) pride (nga rgyal, mAna); (4) ignorance (ma rig pa, avidyA); (5) doubt (the tshom, vicikitsA); (6) afflicted view (lta ba nyon mongs can, kliSTa-dRSTi). This is also one of the seven types of knowledge and awareness (blo rig); for the others see blo rig.
ཐེབས	Check tenses. Thumi (p.122) list those above as meaning: To be fallen in the hands of; to be accurate; etc. ??? (T)
ཐེག-དམན	Comment: The term "Lesser Vehicle" has its origin in the writings of Great Vehicle (theg chen, mahAyAna) authors and was, of course, not used by those to whom it was ascribed. Substitutes such as "non-MahAyAna," "NikAya Buddhism," and "TheravAdayAna" have been suggested in order to avoid the pejorative sense of "Lesser." However, "Lesser Vehicle" is a convenient term in this particular context for a type of tenet system or practice that is seen in Tibetan scholarship to be surpassed but not negated by a "higher" system. The "Lesser Vehicle" is not despised, most of it being incorporated into the "Great Vehicle."
ཐེག-པ-གསུམ-གང-རུང-གི-འཕགས-ལམ-མ-ཐོབ-པའི-གང-ཟག	definition of ordinary being (so so'i skye bo)
ཐེག-པ-ལ-གསར-དུ-ཞུགས-པ	Entry originially had theg pa la gsar du (=nava) zhugs pa. I assume nava is a Sanskrit equivalent not appearing in Conze. What to do? (T)
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-མི-སློབ-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of the Great Vehicle: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-ཐར-པར-བགྲོད-པའི-གོ-སྐབས-ཕྱེ-ཤུལ-དུ-གྱུར-པའི-བྱང-སེམས-ཀྱི-མངོན-རྟོགས	Comment: definition of Bodhisattva path (byang sems kyi lam)
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-རྣལ-འབྱོར-མངོན-སུམ	one of the three types of yogic direct perception (rnal 'byor mngon sum); for others see: {རྣལ་འབྱོར་མངོན་སུམ}
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-སྒོམ-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of the Great Vehicle: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-ཚོགས-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of the Great Vehicle: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཏུ-བགྲོད-པར-བྱེད-པའམ-དེར-བགྲོད-ཟིན-པ-གང-རུང-གིས-བསྡུས-པའི-ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-མཁྱེན-པ	Comment: This is the definition of Great Vehicle path (theg chen gyi lam).
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-སྦྱོར-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of the Great Vehicle: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-མཐོང-ལམ	Comment: This is one of the five paths of the Great Vehicle: path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-མཐོང-ལམ-རྣམ-གྲོལ-ལམ-ལས-ལངས-པའི-མཁྱེན-པ-ཡང-ཡིན-རང-རྒྱུད-ལྡན-གྱི-གང-ཟག-གི-རྒྱུད-ལ-མངོན-གྱུར-དུ-འབྱུང-བའི-ཐེག-ཆེན-གྱི-བདེན-པ-མངོན-རྟོགས	Comment: This is the definition of an exalted wisdom of subsequent attainment of a Great Vehicle path of seeing (theg chen gyi mthong lam rjes thob ye shes).
ཐེར-ཟུག-གི-དུས	Compare: {རྟག་པ་རྟག་པའི་དུས}, permanently
ཐིག	SW added entry.
ཐིག-གདབས	get "thig gdabs" sp, Eng, ex from Lag Len SW added entry.
ཐོ-ཐོར-ཚུགས	ck eng; get ex SW added this entry One of the marks/signs of a Buddhaget and fix
ཐོབ-པ-དོན-དམ	Comment: This is one of the three meanings of ultimate (don dam, paramArtha) according to Matireya's Differentiation of the Middle and Extremes (III.11ab): object-ultimate (don don dam, i.e., thusness); attainment-ultimate (thob pa don dam, i.e., nirvANa); and practice-ultimate (sgrub pa don dam, true paths). BJ calls them terminological divisions, not actual divisions.
ཐོད-རྒལ	Comment: In the Great Completeness (rdzogs chen) in N#ying-ma, essential purity (ka dag) is paired with breakthrough (khregs chod; literally, "breaking through the hard") while spontaneity (lhun grub) is paired with leap-over (thod rgal) in ka dag khregs chod lhun grub thod rgal.
ཐོག-མ-དང-བར-དང-ཐ-མར-དགེ-བ	Is this the title of a book? (T)
ཐོགས-པ	get ex. from Ship
ཐོགས-རེག-གཅིག-པོ-བཀག-ཙམ-གྱི-མེད-དགག	definition of space (nam mkha')
ཐོགས-བཅས-ཀྱི-གཟུགས-མེད	one definition of space (nam mkha')
ཐོལ	Thumi (p.122) has the above tenses and the following English: reveal; come outward; confess (T)
ཐོས-པ	hearing is one of the six powers (stobs drug)
ཐོས-སྟོབས	one of the six powers
ཐོས-པ-ལས-བྱུང-བ	one of the six powers (stobs drug)
ཐོས-པ-ལས-བྱུང-བའི-ཤེས-པ-ཕུན-སུམ-ཚོགས-པའི-རྟེན-ཡིན-པ	Collection of consciousness or marvle of consciousness ?? (T)
ཐུབ-དབང	Comment: Buddhaguhya (sangs rgyas gsang ba) explains that the term muni (thub pa) means that the person has restrained body, speech, and mind (lus la sogs pa sdams pa ni thub pa zhes bya'o). Tibetan oral traditions also take thub pa as referring to one who has overcome the enemy that is the afflictive emotions. Many translators render muni as "sage," but I choose "subduer" because it conveys the sense of conquest that the term has in Tibetan, for thub pa means "able," with a sense of being able to overcome someone else. (ShAkya, the name of this Buddha's clan, also means "able" or "potent," this probably being the reason why the name ShAkyamuni was translated into Tibetan as zAkya thub pa, with the first part of the compound in transliterated Sanskrit and the second in Tibetan.) The term dbang po (indra) means "supreme one," "powerful one," "lord," and more loosely "king"; ShAkyamuni is depicted as the supreme among Subduers.
ཐུབ-པ	Should "capacity" be added to English, per example 1 ? (T)
ཐུགས-བསྐྱེད	I added the "exalted" (T)
ཐུགས-རུས	SW added this record
ཐུགས-ཀྱི-རུས	SW added this record
ཐུན-མོང-པའི-བདག-རྐྱེན	one of the two types of empowering conditions (bdag rkyen); the other is uncommon empowering condition (thun mongs ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen)
ཐུན-མོང-མ-ཡིན-པའི-བདག-རྐྱེན	one of the two types of empowering conditions (bdag rkyen); the other is common empowering condition (thun mong ba'i bdag rkyen)
ཐུན-མོངས-པའི-བདག-རྐྱེན	one of the two types of empowering conditions (bdag rkyen); the other is uncommon empowering condition (thun mongs ma yin pa'i bdag rkyen)
ཐུན-མོངས-མ-ཡིན-པའི-བདག-རྐྱེན	one of the two types of empowering conditions (bdag rkyen); the other is common empowering condition 9thun mongs ba'i bdag rkyen)
ཐུར-ཁྱབ-ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག	one of the four types of perverse pervasion/entailment (khyab pa phyin ci log); for others see: {ཁྱབ་པ་ཕྱིན་ཅི་ལོག}
ཐུར-ཁྱབ-རྣལ-མ	one of the four types of correct pervasion/entailment (khyab pa rnal ma); for others see: {ཁྱབ་པ་རྣལ་མ}
ཏི-ཀཏ	Check Tib. versus Wylie, and English (T)
ཏི-ལ-གྱི-འབྲུ	Sanskrit was in English, and English was in example 1. (T)
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	one of the five determining factors (yul nges nga, paJca-viSaya-pratiniyama); for others see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
ཙམ-ན	SW added this record
ཚ-དམྱལ-བ	one of the 4 divisions of hell beings; for others see: {དམྱལ་བ}
ཚ-ཞིང-སྲེག-པ	definition of fire (me)
ཚད-མས-དམིགས-པ	definition of existent (yod pa)
ཚད-མས-གྲུབ-པ	definition of established base (gzhi grub)
ཚད-མས-རྟོགས-པར-བྱ-བ	definition of object of comprehension (gzhal bya)
ཚད-མའི-རིགས-གཏེར-གྱི-དཀའ-གནས-རྣམ-པར-བཤད-པ-སྡེ-བདུན-རབ-གསལ	ck transl of "tshad ma'i rigs gter" (SW)
ཚད-མའི-སྐྱེས-བུ	one who at the very least has directly realized the four truths
ཚད-མེད-བཞི	(PH) added English from other entries, though some read "limitless ..." and others "immeasurable ..." For compatibility w/ headword and consistency I made all "immeasurable."
ཚང-བ	Should ex. 2 be here ?? (T)
ཚེ-རིག-འཛིན	SW added this record
ཚེམས	Tenses and English from Thumi, p.210 (T)
ཚིག-འགྱུར	as opposed to meaning translation (don 'gyur)
ཚིན	(PH) added from full entry
ཚོགས-ལམ	path of accumulation; Comment: This is one of the five paths (lam): path of accumulation (tshogs lam); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཚོགས-སྤྱི	one of the three types of generality; for others see: {སྤྱི}
ཚོགས-ཀྱི-ལམ	path of accumulation; tshogs lam; Comment: This is one of the five paths (lam): path of accumulation (path of accumulation); path of preparation (sbyor lam); path of seeing (mthong lam); path of meditation (sgom lam); and path of no more learning (mi slob lam).
ཚོར-བ	one of the five omnipresent mental factors ({ཀུན་འགྲོ་ལྔ}, paJca-sarvatraga); for others see: {ཀུན་འགྲོ}; also one of the five aggregates
ཚོར-རྐྱེན	SW added this record; ck Eng.
ཚོར-བ-བཏང-སྙོམས-ཀྱི-ས-པའི-རིགས-སུ-གནས-པ	one of the mere actual bases of the first concentration; for others see: {བསམ་གཏན་དང་པོའི་དངོས་གཞི་ཙམ}
ཚུ-རོལ-མཛེས-པ	Comment: A Nihilist school of Indian philosophy, represented by JayarAzi BhaTTa, author of the Tattvopalava-siMha. Caru means "beautiful." See rgyang phan pa.
ཚུགས	English is according to Thumi, p.208 (T)
ཚུལ-གཉིས	two modes; the two systems; Comment: Gung-tang takes "two modes" (tshul gnyis) as referring to two different great ways of positing what requires interpretation and what is definitive — as found in two modes of the Middle Way School and the Mind-Only School for commenting on the final thought of the Perfection of Wisdom SUtras.
ཚུལ-གསུམ	(PH) Jeffrey, Perdue gives divisions as "1) the property of the subject (pakSa-dharma), 2) the forward pervasion (anvaya-vyApti), 3) the counter-pervasion (vyatireka-vyApti)"
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	one of the ten perfections; for others see: {ཕ་རོལ་ཏུ་ཕྱིན་པ}, {ཕར་ཕྱིན}
ཚུར	Check ex. 1 translation (T)
ཚུར-རོལ-མཛེས-སྨྲ-བ	Comment: A Nihilist school of Indian philosophy, represented by JayarAzi BhaTTa, author of the Tattvopalava-siMha. Caru means "beautiful." See rgyang phan pa.
ཨུཏ-ཝ-ལ	Check Tibetan entry (T)
ཨུཏ-པ-ལ	Check Tibetan entry (T)
ཝ-མོ	fox; Is this a female fox? (T)
ཝ-ར-ནཱ-སི	Check entry. Is this what "n'a" means? (T)
ཡབ-སྲས	for NAgArjuna, this means A#ryadeva; for Dzong-ka-ba, Kya-drup and Gyel-tsap
ཡབ-ཡུམ	this also refers to a deity and his consort in union (T)
ཡབ-སྲས-ཀྱི-དགོངས-པ	in a dGe-lugs-pa context this means Dzong-ka-ba and his two main students, Gyel-tsap and Kay-drub
ཡལ-བར-འདོར-བ	See comment to previous record (T)
ཡལ-ག-ལོ-འདབ-དང-ལྡན-པ	definition of tree (ljon shing)
ཡན-ཆད	SW added Eng. "X and up" & ex. 2
ཡན-ཆོད	get ex Ship 68a.1 SW added this record
ཡན-ལག-གི-ཁ-དོག	one of the two types of color (kha dog); the other is: primary color(s) (rtsa ba'i kha dog)
ཡང-དག	more examples to elucidate the two different uses would be nice. I'm not really clear on this (T)
ཡང-ཞིང-གཡོ-བ	defintion of wind (rlung, vAyu)
ཡང-དག-ལྟ	first of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-མཐའ	Comment: An equivalent of ultimate truth (don dam bden pa, paramArthasatya) so called because of not being perverse.
ཡང-དག-ཀུན-རྫོབ	Comment: From within objects and subjects, the translation for objects is "real conventionality"; for subjects it is "correct conventionality."
ཡང-དག-ཀུན-རྫོབ-བདེན-པ	real conventional truth; Comment: From within objects and subjects, the translation for objects is "real conventional truth"; for subjects it is "correct conventional truth."
ཡང-དག-པར-གྲུབ-པ	true establishment is one of the five objects of negation in the SvAtrantika system, and one of the eight in the PrAsaGgika system; for others see: {དགག་བྱ}
ཡང-དག-པར-རབ-ཏུ-བརྩོན-པ	sixth of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པར-སྤོང-བ	Tibetan for divisions?? (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-ངག	third of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	eighth of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-ངག-དང-ལས-ཀྱི-མཐའ-དང-འཚོ-བ	third, fourth, and fifth of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-འཚོ-བ	fifth of the eight paths which constitute the fourth Noble Truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-ལྟ-བ	first of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-ལས-ཀྱི-མཐའ	fourth of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡང-དག-པའི-དྲན-པ	seventh of the eight paths which constitute the fourth noble truth—true paths (T)
ཡངས-པ-ཅན	one of the main places where Buddha turned the third wheel of doctrine—the Wheel of Good Differentiation (T)
ཡེ-ཤེས-རྡོ-རྗེ	(PH) Jeffrey, should this entry also go under gtsang and rgya?
ཡི	Comment: One of five genitive particles—gi, kyi, gyi, 'i, yi.
ཡི-དགས	one of the six types of ordinary beings; for others see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
ཡི-དྭགས	one of the six types of ordinary beings; for others see: {སོ་སོའི་སྐྱེ་བོ}
ཡི-གེའི-ལྷ	letter deity; Comment: This is the third of six stages in deity yoga meditation in the Concentration Concentration Tantra (bsam gtan phyi ma, dhyAnottara), an Action Tantra: ultimate deity or emptiness deity or suchness deity (don dam pa'i lha, stong pa nyid kyi lha, de kho na nyid kyi lha); sound deity (sgra'i lha); letter deity (yi ge'i lha); form deity (gzugs kyi lha); seal deity (phyag rgya'i lha); sign deity (mtshan ma'i lha).
ཡི-དམ-གྱི-ལྷ	SW added this record
ཡིད-དཔྱོད	Comment: This is one of the seven types of knowledge and awareness; for others see blo rig.
ཡིད-མངོན	one of the four types of direct perceiver; for others see: {མངོན་སུམ}
ཡིད-ཤེས	one of the two types of consciousness (shes pa); the other is: sense consciousness (dbang shes)
ཡིད-ལ-བྱེད	one of the five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga, paJca-sarvatraga); for others see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
ཡིད-ལ-བྱེད-པ	one of the five omnipresent mental factors (kun 'gro lnga, paJca-sarvatraga); for others see: yul nges\nThere was no period in English to indicate a break between UVa translation and Conze, so I just guessed (T)
ཡིད-ལ-བྱེད-པ-ལས-དང-པོ-བ	first of the seven preparations (nyer bsdogs) for the first concentration, the "not unable" (mi lcogs med)
ཡིད-ཆེས-ཀྱི-དད-པ	Comment: This type of faith is said to be induced by valid cognition (tshad mas drang pa).
ཡིད-ཆེས-རྗེས-དཔག	inference through belief; Comment: This is one of the three divisions of inference (rjes dpag)—inference through power of the fact (dngos stobs rjes dpag), inference through renown (grags pa'i rjes dpag), and inference through belief (yid ches rjes dpag).
ཡིད-ཤེས-པ	see: {ཡིད་ཤེས}
ཡིད-ཤེས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-རྟོག-མེད-མངོན-སུམ-ལྟར-སྣང	Comment: This is one of the two types of non-conceptual counterfeit direct perceptions (rtog med mngon sum ltar snang); the other is non-conceptual counterfeit direct perception that is a sense consciousness (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med mngon sum ltar snang).
ཡིད-ཤེས-སུ-གྱུར-པའི-རྟོག-མེད-ལོག-ཤེས	one of the two kinds of non-conceptual mistaken consciousness (rtog med log shes); the other is: non-conceptual mistaken consciousness that is a sense consciousness (dbang shes su gyur pa'i rtog med log shes)
ཡིད-བཞིན-ནོར-བུ	this is also used as a title for the Dalai Lama (T)
ཡིད-མངོན-བཅད-ཤེས	one of the four types of subsequent cognizers; for others see: {བཅད་ཤེས}
ཡིད-ཞེ-སྡང-གིས-ཀྲུགས-པ-ལ-བརྟེན-ནས-ས-གཞི-དམར-པོར-སྣང-བའི-དབང-ཤེས	example of cause of error existing in an immediately preceding condition ('khrul rgyu de ma thag rkyen la yod pa)
ཡིད-བྱུང-བར-གྱུར-ཉམས-པར-འགྱུར	Not sure what to do with Wylie entry (T)
ཡིད-མ-གཏད	one of the three types of direct perceiver for which ascertainment is induced by another according to a terminological division (gzhan las nges kyi tshad ma)
ཡིག-ཆ	examples are: PramANa-vArttika, MahAyAna-sAtra-AlaMkAra; the parts of a yig cha are: (1) refutation of other systems (gzhan lugs dgag pa); (2) presentation of one's own system (rang lugs bzhag pa); (3) elimination of counter-arguments (rtsod pa spong ba)
ཡིན-ཚོད	(PH) too many synonyms
ཡིན-ཡང	ck grammar "of whom you deity is" SW added Eng. "regardless" & ex.
ཡིན-ཁྱབ-མཉམ	coextensive means that whatever is the one is necessarily the other; (T) see: {དངོས་པོའི་ཡིན་ཁྱབ་མཉམ}
ཡིན-པ-སྲིད-པའི-རྟག-པ	one of the two types of permanent phenomenon; the other is permanent phenomenon whose occurrence is not possible (yin pa mi srid pa'i rtag pa) an illustration is: object of knowledge (shes bya)
ཡིན-པ-མི-སྲིད-པའི-རྟག-པ	permanent phenomenon whose occurence is not possible; Comment: There are two types of permanent phenomenon: permanent phenomenon whose occurence is possible (yin pa srid pa'i rtag pa), an illustration of which is the two, permanent and [functioning] thing (rtag dngos gnyis); and permanent phenomenon whose occurence is not possible, an illustration of which is
ཡིས	instrumental; Comment: One of five instrumental particles—gis, kyis, gyis, 'is, yis.
ཡོ-བ	SW added this entry
ཡོ-བྱད	SW added Eng & ex 1 eng. Pls ck.
ཡོ-བྱད-འབྱོར-བ	SW added this record; ck Eng. & ex 1 eng
ཡོད	has; Comment: Since vidyate has the sense of "being found by valid cognition," it is often translated into Tibetan as yod ("exist"), but in other places it is translated as rnyed ("find"). From the translation-choice here, we can see the translators saw the issue as being not the process by which the essential nature of things is found but the manner of its existence.
ཡོད-མཐའ	this implies inherent existence in the PrAsaGgika system
ཡོད-པ	for synonyms and examples see: {གཞི་གྲུབ}
ཡོད-སྨྲ-བ	one of the eighteen VaibhASika schools (T)
ཡོན-ཏན-གསུམ	triguNa; Comment: In SAmkhya the three material qualities (yon tan gsum, triguNa)are 1) lightness (snying stobs, sattva), 2) motility (rdul, rajas), 3) darkness (mun pa, tamas).
ཡོན-ཏན-བརྒྱ-ཕྲག-བཅུ-གཉིས	Brackets in English are mine (T)
ཡོངས-འཛིན	Comment: This is the honorific word for virtuous spritual friend (dge ba'i bshes gnyen).
ཡོངས-གྲུབ	English definition is taken from Cutting Through Appearances, p. 263, and the Tibetan is an attempted reconstruction from that (T)
ཡོངས-སུ-གྲུབ	see: {ཡོངས་གྲུབ}; {ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད}
ཡོངས-སུ-གྲུབ-པ	see: {ཡོངས་གྲུབ}; {ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པའི་མཚན་ཉིད}
ཡོངས-སུ-གྲུབ-པའི-མཚན-ཉིད	one of the three characters of phenomena in the Mind-Only (sems tsam, citta-mAtra) system; the others are: the imputational character (kun brtags pa'i mtshan nyid, parikalpita-lakSaNa) and the other-powered character (gzhan gyi dbang gi mtshan nyid, paratantra-lakSaNa); see: {ཡོངས་གྲུབ}
ཡོངས-སུ-སྒྲུབ-པ	see: {ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ}; {ཡོངས་གྲུབ}
ཡོངས-སུ-འགྲུབ-པ	see: {ཡོངས་སུ་གྲུབ་པ}; {ཡོངས་གྲུབ}
ཡུལ	for synonyms and examples see: {གཞི་གྲུབ}
ཡུལ-དུརག	one of the divisions of "various constituents" (khams tha dad pa) (PH)
ཡུལ-ངེས	Comment: Determining mental factors are one of six main groupings of mental factors (sems byung, caitta): (1) five omnipresent (kun 'gro, sarvatraga) mental factors; (2) five determining (yul nges, viSaya-pratiniyama) mental factors; (3) eleven virtuous (dge ba, kuzala) mental factors; (4) six root afflictions (rtsa nyon, mUla-kleza); (5) twenty secondary afflictions (nye nyong, upakleza); and (6) four changeable (gzhan 'gyur, anyathAbhAva) mental factors.
ཡུལ-ཅན-གྱི-དགག-བྱ	compare: yul gyi dgag bya
ཡུལ-གྱི-དགག-བྱ	this is always a non-existent; compare: yul can gyi dgag bya
ཡུལ-དེ-རྟོག-པ-ལ-སྣང-བ	Not to be confused with 'appearing objects of thought' (rtog pa'i snang yul) (GD:547)
ཡུལ-བྷ-ར-ཎཧ-ཞི	Check Tibetan entry vs. Wylie. Seems strange (T)
ཡུལ-སོ-སོ-ངེས-པ	see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
ཡུལ-ངེས-པ	see: {ཡུལ་ངེས}
ཟའོ	see: {ཟ}
ཟབ-ཅིང-རྒྱ-ཆེ-བ	often refers to profound emptiness and vast methods of compassion Is this right? If so, need to change following entries (T)
ཟག-བཅས-ཐམས-ཅད-སྡུག-བསྔལ-བ	one of the four seals (phyag rgya bzhi); for others see: {ཕྱག་རྒྱ}
ཟས-བཞི	see: {ཟས}
ཞགས-པ	SW added this record
ཞལ-ཏ	ck Sanskrit; get Peking # & vol. SW added this record
ཞལ-སྔ-ནས	SW added this record
ཞལ-ཏའི-སྤྲིང-ཡིག	get Peking # & vol. SW added this record
ཞེ-སྡང-མེད-པ	adveSa; non-hatred; Comment: This is one of the eleven virtuous mental factors (sems byung dge ba, kuzalacaitta): (1) faith (dad pa, zraddhA); (2) shame (ngo tsha shes pa, hrI); (3) embarrassment (khrel yod pa, apatrApya); (4) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (5) adveSa (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); (6) non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha); (7) effort (brtson 'grus, vIrya); (8) pliancy (shin tu sbyangs pa, prasrabdhi); (9) conscientiousness (bag yod pa, apramAda); (10) equanimity (btang snyoms, upekSA); (11) non-harmfulness (rnam par mi 'tshe ba, avihiMsA). Non-hatred is one of the three virtuous roots (dge ba'i rtsa ba, kuzalamUla) are: (1) non-attachment (ma chags pa, alobha); (2) adveSa (zhe sdang med pa, adveSa); non-ignorance (gti mug med pa, amoha).
ཞེན-ཡུལ	conceived object; Comment: Although in the past I have translated zhen yul as "referent object," I now use "conceived object." This is to provide separate terms for the difference between (1) a form's being a conceived object of a conceptual consciousness (gzugs sogs rtog pa'i zhen yul yin pa) and (2) a form's being a referent of a conceptual consciousness (gzugs sogs rtog pa'i zhen gzhi yin pa), as the latter is meant when discussed in the context of the object of negation in selflessness.
ཞེས-པ	English of ex 1 originally had "isolation of body" (T)
ཞི-བ-འཚོ	add his dates
ཞིབ-མོ-རྣམ-ཐག	one of NAgArjuna's "Six Collections of Reasonings" (rigs tshogs drug); for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས}
ཞིབ-མོ-རྣམ-པར-འཐག-པ-ཞེས-བྱ-བའི-མདོ	one of NAgArjuna's "Six Collections of Reasonings" (rigs tshogs drug); for others see: {རིགས་ཚོགས}
ཞུ	JH: how do you want to handle this—one word (here, "zhu") is a form of two different verbs? (SW)
ཞུགས	Thumi, p.218, has zhug for the future. Check previous record (T)
ཟིལ-གྱིས-གནོན	SW added Eng. "suppress" and ex. 2 (Mi g.yo ba rjes gnang)
ཟིལ-གྱིས-ནོན-པ	SW added Eng. "suppress"
ཟིལ-གྱིས-ནོན-པར-འགྱུར	SW added Eng. "suppress"
ཟིལ-གྱིས-ནོན-པར-གྱུར-པ	SW added Eng. "suppress"
ཟིལ-གྱིས-མི-ནོན-པ	SW added Eng. "not suppress"
ཟིལ-གྱིས-གནོན-པ	SW added Eng. "suppress" and ex. (Mi g.yo ba rjes gnang)
ཟློས-པའི-བག-ཆགས	Comment: These are predispositions causing generation of conceptual consciousnesses designating various conventions.
ཟུང-འཇུག	union; Comment: This is the sixth of the six stages of the completion stage in the GuhyasamAja system of Highest Yoga Tanta: physical isolation (lus dben), verbal isolation (ngag dben), mental isolation (sems dben), illusory body (sgyus lus), clear light ('od gsal), union (zung 'jug).
