སྐུ-མ-རྙོངས-པ	Fifty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.
ཕྱལ-ཕྱང-ངེ-བ	Fifty-eighth of the eighty minor marks.
སྐུ-ལ-གཉེར-མ-མེད-པ	Literally, “unwrinkled body;” fifty-ninth of the eighty minor marks.\nabdomen [lit. body] that is unwrinkled
འོད-གསལ	 Sixth god realm of form, meaning “luminosity.”| Sixth god realm of form, meaning “luminosity.” | The highest of the three paradises that are the second dhyāna paradises in the form realm. |The highest of the three paradises that are the second dhyāna paradises in the form realm. 
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པ-ལས-བྱུང	 A buddha countless eons in the past.\nAbhāva­samudgata|A buddha countless eons in the past.\nAbhāva­samudgata 
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པ-ལས-བྱུང-བ	 A buddha countless eons in the past.\nAbhāva­samudgata|A buddha countless eons in the past.\nAbhāva­samudgata 
ཆོས-མངོན-པ	 Conventionally, the general name for the Buddhist teachings presented in a scientific manner, as a fully elaborated transcendental psychology. As one of the branches of the Canon, it corresponds to the discipline of wisdom (the Sūtras corresponding to meditation, and the Vinaya to morality). Ultimately the Abhidharma is “pure wisdom, with its coordinate mental functions” (Prajñāmalā sānucārā), according to Vasubandhu.|Conventionally, the general name for the Buddhist teachings presented in a scientific manner, as a fully elaborated transcendental psychology. As one of the branches of the Canon, it corresponds to the discipline of wisdom (the Sūtras corresponding to meditation, and the Vinaya to morality). Ultimately the Abhidharma is “pure wisdom, with its coordinate mental functions” (Prajñāmalā sānucārā), according to Vasubandhu. 
མངོན-པར-ཤེས-ཐོབ	 A short form of Sāgara­vara­dhara­buddhi­vikrīḍitābhijña, the name that Ānanda will have when he is a buddha.|A short form of Sāgara­vara­dhara­buddhi­vikrīḍitābhijña, the name that Ānanda will have when he is a buddha. 
མངོན-པར-དགའ-བ	 Lit. “Intense Delight.” The universe, or buddhafield of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, lying in the east beyond innumerable galaxies, whence Vimalakīrti came to reincarnate in our Sahā universe. | The realm in which Mahā­maudgalyāyana will become a buddha in the distant future.| The realm in which Mahā­maudgalyāyana will become a buddha in the distant future. | The realm of Buddha Akṣobhya in the east. | The realm of Buddha Akṣobhya, beyond countless buddha realms in the eastern direction. |Lit. “Intense Delight.” The universe, or buddhafield of the Tathāgata Akṣobhya, lying in the east beyond innumerable galaxies, whence Vimalakīrti came to reincarnate in our Sahā universe. 
ཆོས-མངོན-པའི-མཛོད	 An important work written by Vasubandhu, probably in the fourth century, as a critical compendium of the Abhidharmic science.|An important work written by Vasubandhu, probably in the fourth century, as a critical compendium of the Abhidharmic science. 
མངོན-ཤེས-ཡེ-ཤེས-ཟིལ-གནོན	 A shorter form of the name of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū.|A shorter form of the name of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. 
མངོན-འཕགས-རྒྱལ-པོ	 An eon in the future.|An eon in the future. 
རྣམ-ཤེས-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ལ-གནས-པ	 Eighth of the eight sense fields of mastery. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-209.| Eighth of the eight sense fields of mastery. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-209. |Eighth of the eight sense fields of mastery. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-209. 
རྣམ-ཤེས-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བསྒྲུབས-ཏེ-གནས-པ	 Fifth of the eight aspects of liberation.\none achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’| Fifth of the eight aspects of liberation.\none achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ |Fifth of the eight aspects of liberation.\none achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ 
ནམ-མཁའ-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ལ-གནས-པ	 Seventh of the eight sense fields of mastery. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-209.| Seventh of the eight sense fields of mastery. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-209. |Seventh of the eight sense fields of mastery. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-209. 
ནམ-མཁའ-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བསྒྲུབས-ཏེ-གནས-པ	 Fourth of the eight aspects of liberation.| Fourth of the eight aspects of liberation. |Fourth of the eight aspects of liberation. 
ཞི-གནས	 Meditation of peaceful stability.| Meditation of peaceful stability. | Meditation technique to calm the mind. | One of the basic forms of Buddhist meditation, which focuses on calming the mind. Often presented as part of a pair of meditation techniques, with the other technique being “insight.” | The first of the two main branches of Buddhist meditation, aiming at rendering the mind stable, subtle, and pliable. | “Mental quiescence” is a general term for all types of mind-practice, meditation, contemplation, concentration, etc., that cultivate one-pointedness of mind and lead to a state of peacefulness and freedom from concern with any sort of object. It is paired with “transcendental analysis” or “insight,” which combines the analytic faculty with this one-pointedness to reach high realizations such as the absence of self (see “transcendental analysis”). “Mental quiescence” and “transcendental analysis” were coined by E. Obermiller in his invaluable study “Prajṅa Pāramitā Doctrine, as Exposed in the Abhisamayālaṃkāra of Maitreya” (Acta Orientalia, Vol. XI [Heidelberg, 1932], pp. 1-134). |The first of the two main branches of Buddhist meditation, aiming at rendering the mind stable, subtle, and pliable. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-དགྱེས-གནས-སྐྱོབ	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.| A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. |A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
ཆོས-གནས-པ-ཉིད	 A synonym for emptiness, and the expanse of reality (dharmadhātu).| A synonym for emptiness, and the expanse of reality (dharmadhātu). |A synonym for emptiness, and the expanse of reality (dharmadhātu). 
སེམས-མེད-པར-གནས-པ	 Name of the seventy-third meditative stability.| Name of the seventy-third meditative stability. |Name of the seventy-third meditative stability. 
ཆོས-རྣམས-ཀྱི-ཆོས-གནས-པ-ཉིད	 A synonym for emptiness, and the expanse of reality (dharmadhātu).| A synonym for emptiness, and the expanse of reality (dharmadhātu). |A synonym for emptiness, and the expanse of reality (dharmadhātu). 
དེ-བཞིན-ཉིད-ལ-གནས-ཤིང-སེམས-མེད-པ	 Name of the 108th meditative stability.| Name of the 108th meditative stability. |Name of the 108th meditative stability. 
གནས	 Also translated here as “abode,” and “resting place.”| Also translated here as “sanctuary,” and “abode.” | In “The Chapter on Going Forth,” Kalyāṇamitra reads this as an abbreviation of “reliable instructor” (Tib. {gnas kyi slob dpon}). A reliable monk is one who has passed ten years as a monk and possesses five qualities and is thus fit to guide new monks, grant ordination, and instruction. In “The Chapter on Going Forth,” the Buddha says a monk who has been ordained five years may be considered “reliable” enough to travel without a reliable instructor between monsoons. Though the text does not address the issue, a monk of five years ordination would not, in ordinary circumstances, serve as a reliable instructor. |Also translated here as “sanctuary,” and “resting place.” 
གནས-གཙང-མ	 A form-realm paradise that is never destroyed during the cycles of the destruction and creation of the universe.| A form-realm paradise that is never destroyed during the cycles of the destruction and creation of the universe. | Name for the five highest levels of existence within the form realm. | The five highest of the paradises that consitute the realm of form, which is above the paradises of the realm of desire in which our world is situated. |Name for the five highest levels of existence within the form realm. 
གནས-གཙང-མའི-རིས	 These realms and abodes denote the hierarchy of the gods who, in the manner of human beings and antigods, partake of the higher realms (svarga, {mtho ris}) of rebirth, but nonetheless remain trapped within cyclic existence. The gods altogether comprise (i) six god realms within the world system of desire, commencing with Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika and Trayas­triṃśa, and concluding with Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin; (ii) the twelve Brahmā realms, extending from Brahmakāyika through Brahmapurohita, Mahā­brahmā, Parī­ttābha, A­pramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parītta­śubha, A­pramāṇa­śubha, Śubha­kṛtsna, An­abhraka, and Puṇya­prasava to Bṛhat­phala, which are attained corresponding to lesser, middling, and higher degrees of the four meditative concentrations; and (iii) the five Pure Abodes at the pinnacle of the world system of form, extending from Avṛha, through Atapa, Su­dṛśa, and Sudarśana to Akaniṣṭha. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1427 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1582. This hierarchy is conveniently illustrated in the form of a chart. See, for example, Dudjom Rinpoche (1991): 14–15.| These realms and abodes denote the hierarchy of the gods who, in the manner of human beings and antigods, partake of the higher realms (svarga, {mtho ris}) of rebirth, but nonetheless remain trapped within cyclic existence. The gods altogether comprise (i) six god realms within the world system of desire, commencing with Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika and Trayas­triṃśa, and concluding with Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin; (ii) the twelve Brahmā realms, extending from Brahmakāyika through Brahmapurohita, Mahā­brahmā, Parī­ttābha, A­pramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parītta­śubha, A­pramāṇa­śubha, Śubha­kṛtsna, An­abhraka, and Puṇya­prasava to Bṛhat­phala, which are attained corresponding to lesser, middling, and higher degrees of the four meditative concentrations; and (iii) the five Pure Abodes at the pinnacle of the world system of form, extending from Avṛha, through Atapa, Su­dṛśa, and Sudarśana to Akaniṣṭha. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1427 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1582. This hierarchy is conveniently illustrated in the form of a chart. See, for example, Dudjom Rinpoche (1991): 14–15. |These realms and abodes denote the hierarchy of the gods who, in the manner of human beings and antigods, partake of the higher realms (svarga, {mtho ris}) of rebirth, but nonetheless remain trapped within cyclic existence. The gods altogether comprise (i) six god realms within the world system of desire, commencing with Catur­mahā­rāja­kāyika and Trayas­triṃśa, and concluding with Yāma, Tuṣita, Nirmāṇa­rata, and Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin; (ii) the twelve Brahmā realms, extending from Brahmakāyika through Brahmapurohita, Mahā­brahmā, Parī­ttābha, A­pramāṇābha, Ābhāsvara, Parītta­śubha, A­pramāṇa­śubha, Śubha­kṛtsna, An­abhraka, and Puṇya­prasava to Bṛhat­phala, which are attained corresponding to lesser, middling, and higher degrees of the four meditative concentrations; and (iii) the five Pure Abodes at the pinnacle of the world system of form, extending from Avṛha, through Atapa, Su­dṛśa, and Sudarśana to Akaniṣṭha. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1427 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1582. This hierarchy is conveniently illustrated in the form of a chart. See, for example, Dudjom Rinpoche (1991): 14–15. 
དགའ-ལྡན-གྱི-གནས	 One of the heavens of Buddhist cosmology, counted among the six heavens of the desire realm, it is home of future Buddha Maitreya.| One of the heavens of Buddhist cosmology, counted among the six heavens of the desire realm, it is home of future Buddha Maitreya. |One of the heavens of Buddhist cosmology, counted among the six heavens of the desire realm, it is home of future Buddha Maitreya. 
གནས-ལ-རྟེན-པ-མེད-པ	 Name of the thirty-second meditative stability.|Name of the thirty-second meditative stability. 
མེ-ཏོག-སྣ-ཚོགས-གནས	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
ཐུབ-པའི-དྲང-སྲོང-རྣམས-ཀྱི-གནས	 A place, described in the opening lines of this sūtra as being on Khalatika mountain, but not mentioned elsewhere in the Kangyur except (as {thub pa'i drang srong chen po'i gnas}) in the Vimala­prabha­paripṛcchā (Toh 168) in connection with the Gomasalagandha stūpa in Khotan.|A place, described in the opening lines of this sūtra as being on Khalatika mountain, but not mentioned elsewhere in the Kangyur except (as {thub pa'i drang srong chen po'i gnas}) in the Vimala­prabha­paripṛcchā (Toh 168) in connection with the Gomasalagandha stūpa in Khotan. 
ཚངས-པའི-གནས	 Love, compassion, joy, equanimity.| Love, compassion, joy, equanimity. | The four qualities that are said to result in rebirth in the paradise of Brahmā and were a practice already prevalent before Śākyamuni’s teaching: limitless love, compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity. | The four qualities that are said to result in rebirth in the paradise of Brahmā, and were a practice already prevalent before Śākyamuni’s teaching, are limitless love, compassion, rejoicing, and equanimity. |Love, compassion, joy, equanimity. 
ཤུ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
སྨོན-པ-མེད-པ	 Meditative concentration which views nirvāṇa, which is the complete pacification of the aggregates; the third of the Three Doors of Liberation. | The absence of any conceptual goal that one is focused upon achieving, knowing that all composite phenomena create suffering. One of the three doorways to liberation. | Third of the Three Doors of Liberation (see glossary). Objectively, it is equivalent to voidness; subjectively, it is the outcome of the holy gnosis of voidness as the realization of the ultimate lack of anything to wish for, whether voidness itself, or even Buddhahood. See “emptiness.” | lacking aspiration| lacking aspiration |The absence of any conceptual goal that one is focused upon achieving, knowing that all composite phenomena create suffering. One of the three doorways to liberation. 
མཚན-མ-མ-མཆིས-པ	The absence of the conceptual identification of perceptions. Knowing that the true nature has no attributes, such as color, shape, etc. One of the three doorways to liberation.
མཚན-མ-མེད-པ	 Also translated here as “without mental images.” | In ultimate reality, there is no sign, as a sign signals or signifies something to someone and hence is inextricably involved with the relative world. We are so conditioned by signs that they seem to speak to us as if they had a voice of their own. The letter “A” seems to pronounce itself to us as we see it, and the stop-sign fairly shouts at us. However, the configuration of two slanted lines with a crossbar has in itself nothing whatsoever to do with the phenomenon made with the mouth and throat in the open position, when expulsion of breath makes the vocal cords resonate “ah.” By extending such analysis to all signs, we may get an inkling of what is meant by “signlessness,” which is essentially equivalent to voidness, and to “wishlessness” (see entry). Voidness, signlessness, and wishlessness form the “Three Doors of Liberation.” | Meditative concentration which views the five aggregates, the basis for the conception of a self, as faulty; the second of the three doors of liberation.| The absence of the conceptual identification of perceptions. Knowing that the true nature has no attributes, such as color, shape, etc. One of the three doorways to liberation. |The absence of the conceptual identification of perceptions. Knowing that the true nature has no attributes, such as color, shape, etc. One of the three doorways to liberation. 
ལྡོག-པ	In Buddhist logic, the term “distinguishing counterpart” (vyāvṛtti, {ldog pa}) denotes a given phenomenon that conceptually appears to be the opposite of a phenomenon of a dissimilar class but is not actually existent, such as the idea of a specific form that appears in conceptual thought.
བདེ-བ-དང-སྡུག-བསྔལ-ཐམས-ཅད-ལ-མངོན-པར-དགའ-བ-མེད-པ	 Name of the ninety-third meditative stability.| Name of the ninety-third meditative stability. |Name of the ninety-third meditative stability. 
བདག-མེད-པ	 This describes actual reality, as finally there is no enduring person himself or thing itself, since persons and things exist only in the relative, conventional, or superficial sense, and not in any ultimate or absolute sense. To understand Buddhist teaching correctly, we must be clear about the two senses (conventional/ultimate, or relative/absolute), since mistaking denial of ultimate self as denial of conventional self leads to nihilism, and mistaking affirmation of conventional self as affirmation of ultimate self leads to absolutism. Nihilism and absolutism effectively prevent us from realizing our enlightenment, hence are to be avoided. | without self| without self |This describes actual reality, as finally there is no enduring person himself or thing itself, since persons and things exist only in the relative, conventional, or superficial sense, and not in any ultimate or absolute sense. To understand Buddhist teaching correctly, we must be clear about the two senses (conventional/ultimate, or relative/absolute), since mistaking denial of ultimate self as denial of conventional self leads to nihilism, and mistaking affirmation of conventional self as affirmation of ultimate self leads to absolutism. Nihilism and absolutism effectively prevent us from realizing our enlightenment, hence are to be avoided. 
བདག-མེད	 Selflessness denotes the lack of inherent existence in self-identity and also, more subtly, in all physical and mental phenomena. Also translated here as “non-self” or “absence of self.”| The absence of any enduring, singular, or independent essence in individuals or phenomena. | The view that there is no self existing independent of the five psycho-physical aggregates. Also translated here as “selflessness” and “absence of self.”\nabsence of self | lack of an inherent substance |The view that there is no self existing independent of the five psycho-physical aggregates. Also translated here as “selflessness” and “absence of self.”\nabsence of self 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 A general term for the practice of meditative absorption aimed at developing profound states of concentration. | A generic name for the one hundred and eleven meditative stabilities enumerated in the present text.\nmeditative stabilities| A generic name for the one hundred and eleven meditative stabilities enumerated in the present text.\nmeditative stabilities | A mind focused one-pointedly on an object of concentration. | A state of meditative concentration or absorption. | Concentration of total mental equanimity which is such a powerful mental state it can be turned to accomplish amazing results. | One of the synonyms for the meditative state, literally “a completely focused state.” | One of the synonyms for the meditative state, meaning a completely focused state. | Placing the mind on an object of attention, or sometimes more generally, a meditative state. | See “absorption.” | State of mental absorption or one-pointed concentration. |A state of meditative concentration or absorption. 
སྙོམ-འཇུག	 One of the synonyms for the meditative state. The Tibetan translation interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level,” whereas it may very well be like “samādhi,” sam-āpatti, with the similar meaning of concentration. Unlike samādhi, however, it also occurs with the meaning of “completion,” “attainment,” and “diligent practice.”| One of the synonyms for the meditative state. The Tibetan translation interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level,” whereas it may very well be like “samādhi,” sam-āpatti, with the similar meaning of concentration. Unlike samādhi, however, it also occurs with the meaning of “completion,” “attainment,” and “diligent practice.” | “Absorption” has been translated as “meditation,” “contemplation,” “attainment,” etc., and any of these words might serve. The problem is to establish one English word for each of the important Sanskrit words samāpatti, dhyāna, samādhi, bhāvanā, etc., so as to preserve a consistency with the original. Therefore, I have adopted for these terms, respectively, “absorption,” “contemplation,” “concentration” and “realization” or “cultivation,” reserving the word “meditation” for general use with any of the terms when they are used not in a specific sense but to indicate mind-practice in general. |“Absorption” has been translated as “meditation,” “contemplation,” “attainment,” etc., and any of these words might serve. The problem is to establish one English word for each of the important Sanskrit words samāpatti, dhyāna, samādhi, bhāvanā, etc., so as to preserve a consistency with the original. Therefore, I have adopted for these terms, respectively, “absorption,” “contemplation,” “concentration” and “realization” or “cultivation,” reserving the word “meditation” for general use with any of the terms when they are used not in a specific sense but to indicate mind-practice in general. 
སྒྱུ-མ-ལྟ-བུའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 The realization that all phenomena are illusory and empty, which occurs when a bodhisattva understands the unborn nature of phenomena.|The realization that all phenomena are illusory and empty, which occurs when a bodhisattva understands the unborn nature of phenomena. 
བསམ-གཏན	 Four levels of meditation within the Form Realm.\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-044-005.html#UT22084-044-005-208. | Generally one of the synonyms for meditation, referring to a state of mental stability. The specific four dhyānas are four successively subtler states of meditation that are said to lead to rebirth into the corresponding four levels of the form realm, which are composed of seventeen paradises. | Literally “stability of mind,” denotes specific levels of concentration attained by the sustained practice of calm abiding (śamatha). | Meditative concentration is defined as the one-pointed abiding in an undistracted state of mind free from afflicted mental states. It is an advanced form of calm abiding, where often both calm abiding and penetrative insight may be present in perfect union. Four states of meditative concentration are identified as being conducive to birth within the world system of form, each of which has three phases of intensity. However, in the context‌ of the Great Vehicle, meditative concentration is the fifth of the six transcendent perfections. See also “four meditative concentrations” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-170. | One of the synonyms for meditation, referring to a state of mental stability. | One-pointed concentration in which the mind is undistracted and untainted by the afflictions.| One-pointed concentration in which the mind is undistracted and untainted by the afflictions. | See “absorption.” | Sometimes translated as “absorption” or “meditative absorption,” this is one of several similar but specific terms for particualr states of mind to be cultivated. Dhyāna is the term often used in the context of eight successive stages, four of form and four formless. |Four levels of meditation within the Form Realm.\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-044-005.html#UT22084-044-005-208. 
མཐར-གྱིས-གནས-པའི-སྙོམས-པར-འཇུག-པ-དགུ	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-178.\nnine serial steps of meditative absorption | The four concentrations, the four formless states, and the equilibrium of cessation.| The four dhyānas, the four formless absorptions, and the absorption of cessation. |See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-178.\nnine serial steps of meditative absorption 
ཅི-ཡང-མེད-པའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ཀྱི-སྙོམས-འཇུག	 Third of the four meditative absorptions.| Third of the four meditative absorptions. |Third of the four meditative absorptions. 
འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-མིན-གྱི-སྙོམས-འཇུག	 Fourth of the four meditative absorptions.| Fourth of the four meditative absorptions. |Fourth of the four meditative absorptions. 
ནམ-མཁའ-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ཀྱི-སྙོམས-འཇུག	 First of the four meditative absorptions.| First of the four meditative absorptions. |First of the four meditative absorptions. 
རྣམ-ཤེས-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ཀྱི-སྙོམས-འཇུག	 Second of the four formless meditative absorptions.| Second of the four formless meditative absorptions. |Second of the four formless meditative absorptions. 
དབང-པོ-དང-སྟོབས-དང-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-དང-རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པ-དང-བསམ-གཏན-དང-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-དང-སྙོམས-པར-འཇུག-པའི-ཀུན-ནས-ཉོན-མོངས-པ-དང-རྣམ-པར-བྱང-བ-དང-ལྡང-པ-ཤེས-པ-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Eighth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know all the afflicted and purified mental states, and their emergence, associated with the meditative concentrations, aspects of liberation, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions\ndefinitive knowledge of all the afflicted and purified mental states and their emergence, with respect to the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, aspects of liberation, meditative concentrations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions| Eighth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know all the afflicted and purified mental states, and their emergence, associated with the meditative concentrations, aspects of liberation, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions\ndefinitive knowledge of all the afflicted and purified mental states and their emergence, with respect to the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, aspects of liberation, meditative concentrations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions |Eighth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know all the afflicted and purified mental states, and their emergence, associated with the meditative concentrations, aspects of liberation, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions\ndefinitive knowledge of all the afflicted and purified mental states and their emergence, with respect to the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, aspects of liberation, meditative concentrations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions 
མི-གཡོ-བ	 Also means unmoving, immovable. | Another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. | Referring to actions, this term signifies the actions of beings in the subtle god-realms of form and formlessness that can only lead to rebirth in the same realm in the next life. | The eighth bodhisattva bhūmi.| The eighth bodhisattva bhūmi. | The eighth bodhisattva level; see also Acala (the masculine form), another name of the deity Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. |Also means unmoving, immovable. 
མི-གཡོ-བ-ནག-པོ	 Acala corresponding to Buddha Akṣobhya in the center of the maṇḍala.|Acala corresponding to Buddha Akṣobhya in the center of the maṇḍala. 
མི-གཡོ-བ-ལྗང-གུ	 Acala corresponding to Buddha Amoghasiddhi in the north of the maṇḍala.|Acala corresponding to Buddha Amoghasiddhi in the north of the maṇḍala. 
མི-གཡོ-བ-དམར-པོ	 Acala corresponding to Buddha Amitābha in the west of the maṇḍala.|Acala corresponding to Buddha Amitābha in the west of the maṇḍala. 
མི-གཡོ-བ-གཀར-པོ	 Acala corresponding to Buddha Vairocana in the east of the maṇḍala.|Acala corresponding to Buddha Vairocana in the east of the maṇḍala. 
མི-གཡོ-བ-སེར-པོ	 Acala corresponding to Buddha Ratnasambhava in the south of the maṇḍala.|Acala corresponding to Buddha Ratnasambhava in the south of the maṇḍala. 
མི-གཡོ	 The eighth bodhisattva bhūmi.|The eighth bodhisattva bhūmi. 
མེ	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
སློབ-དཔོན	 A spiritual teacher, meaning one who knows the conduct or practice (carya) to be performed. It can also be a title for a scholar, though that is not the context in this sūtra. | A spiritual teacher, meaning one who knows the conduct or practice (caryā) to be performed. It can also be a title for a scholar, though that is not the context in this sūtra. | Along with the position of preceptor, this is one of two official positions created by the Buddha to ensure that new monks would receive sufficient training. The Buddha specified five types of instructor: instructors of novices, instructors who inquire into confidential matters, officiants, givers of instruction, and recitation instructors.| Teacher (sometimes more specifically the deputy or substitute of the upādhyāya). |Along with the position of preceptor, this is one of two official positions created by the Buddha to ensure that new monks would receive sufficient training. The Buddha specified five types of instructor: instructors of novices, instructors who inquire into confidential matters, officiants, givers of instruction, and recitation instructors. 
ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ	 To look after a novice ward or apprentice.| To look after a novice ward or apprentice. |To look after a novice ward or apprentice. 
གཟུང-བ	 To look after a novice ward or apprentice.| To look after a novice ward or apprentice. |To look after a novice ward or apprentice. 
བཟོད-པ	 Forbearance, tolerance, acceptance. | The capacity to accept or tolerate experiences which ordinary beings cannot tolerate. It is the preparatory step to profound insight into reality. It also refers to the third stage of the path of joining ({sbyor lam}; prayogamārga).\nacceptance | Third of the four aspects of the path of preparation, also translated here as “acceptance.” However, in the context‌ of the transcendent perfections, tolerance is the third of the six transcendent perfections.| Third of the four aspects of the path of preparation.\nAlso translated here as “tolerance.” |The capacity to accept or tolerate experiences which ordinary beings cannot tolerate. It is the preparatory step to profound insight into reality. It also refers to the third stage of the path of joining ({sbyor lam}; prayogamārga).\nacceptance 
ཡོངས-སུ-གཟུང-བ-མེད-པ	 without acceptance| without acceptance |without acceptance 
བརྒྱད-པའི-ས	 Name of the third level attainable by bodhisatatvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.|Name of the third level attainable by bodhisatatvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282. 
མི-སྐྱེ-བའི-ཆོས-ལ-བཟོད-པ	 An attainment characteristic of the effortless and spontaneous wakefulness of the 8th ground of the bodhisattvas. | Here we are concerned with the “intuitive tolerance of the birthlessness (or incomprehensibility) of all things” (anutpattika­dharma­kṣānti or anupalabdhi­dharma­kṣānti). To translate kṣānti as “knowledge” or “conviction” defeats entirely the Skt. usage and its intended sense: In the face of birthlessness or incomprehensibility (i.e., the ultimate reality), ordinary knowledge and especially convictions are utterly lost; this is because the mind loses objectifiability of anything and has nothing to grasp, and its process of coming to terms may be described only as a conscious cancellation through absolute negations of any false sense of certainty about anything. Through this tolerance, the mind reaches a stage where it can bear its lack of bearings, as it were, can endure this kind of extreme openness, this lack of any conviction, etc. There are three degrees of this tolerance—verbal (ghoṣānugā), conforming (anulomikī), and complete. See Introduction, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-19, and Lamotte, Appendice, Note III. | See “tolerance of the birthlessness of things.”| See “tolerance of the birthlessness of things.” | The forbearance to accept and understand the non-arising of phenomena, attained by a bodhisattva on the 8th level (see note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-062-018.html#UT22084-062-018-183). |An attainment characteristic of the effortless and spontaneous wakefulness of the 8th ground of the bodhisattvas. 
ཡོངས-སུ-ཟིན-པ	 Also translated here as “accepted.”|Also translated here as “favored.” 
དངོས-གྲུབ	 An accomplishment that is the goal of sādhana practice; a supernatural power or ability. | An accomplishment that is the goal of sādhana. | The mundane and transcendent abilities that are conferred through the perfection of yogic practices.| The mundane and transcendent abilities that are conferred through the perfection of yogic practices. |An accomplishment that is the goal of sādhana. 
གྲངས-དག-འདེབས	As in to account for the income and allocations of a monastery.
རྨད-བྱུང	One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine.
ཡོན-ཏན-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-ཚོགས-སུ-གྱུར-པ	Name of the seventy-second meditative stability.
སྨོན-ལམ-བསམ-གྱིས-མི-ཁྱབ-པ-ཁྱད-པར-དུ-འཕགས-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha countless eons in the past.|A buddha countless eons in the past. 
ཆོས-ཉིད-ཀྱིས-ཐོབ-པ	 The acquisition of vows through direct insight into the nature of reality rather than through formal ceremony.|The acquisition of vows through direct insight into the nature of reality rather than through formal ceremony. 
ལས	 Also rendered in this sūtra as “action.” | Also rendered in this sūtra as “karma.” | Generally meaning “work,” or “action,” it is an important concept in Buddhist philosophy as the cumulative force of previous actions, which determines present experience and will determine future existences. | Intention or what follows an intention. Intention is mental karma; what follows an intention is verbal and bodily karma. | The impact of past actions in the present and future. Also rendered here as “karma.”| The impact of past actions in the present and future. Also rendered here as “karma.” | The impact of past actions in the present and future. Also translated here as “past action.” |Matters that govern the saṅgha community’s daily life, regular observances (such as the rains retreat and the purification) and special events (like ordination) are ratified by a formal act of the saṅgha. There are one hundred and one such types of formal acts, all of which fall into one of three categories depending on the procedure needed for ratification. An act of motion alone requires only a petition; an act whose second member is a motion require a motion and the statement of the act; while an act whose fourth member is a motion require a motion and three statements of the act. 
ནན-ཏུར-གྱི-ལས	 A formal act of the saṅgha requiring a act whose fourth member is a motion, meted out to a wayward monk or monks. There are five types: acts of censure, chastening, expulsion, reconciliation, and suspension.|A formal act of the saṅgha requiring a act whose fourth member is a motion, meted out to a wayward monk or monks. There are five types: acts of censure, chastening, expulsion, reconciliation, and suspension. 
བསྐྲད-པའི-ལས	 One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha.\nacts of expulsion\nexpulsion|One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha.\nacts of expulsion\nexpulsion 
བསྡིགས-པའི-ལས	 One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha. This was first imposed on the Pandulohitaka monks for their quarrelsomeness.\nacts of censure\ncensure|One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha. This was first imposed on the Pandulohitaka monks for their quarrelsomeness.\nacts of censure\ncensure 
གནས-ནས-དབྱུང-བའི-ལས	 One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha. A monk may be suspended on one of seven grounds: failing to acknowledge a fault; refusing to amend or rehabilitate one’s behavior; deviant views; being overly belligerent and quarrelsome; creating the circumstances for a quarrel; maintaining overly close relations with nuns, unruly people, and ne’er-do-wells; and refusing to let go of a Dharma matter that has been peacefully resolved.\nacts of suspension\nsuspension|One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha. A monk may be suspended on one of seven grounds: failing to acknowledge a fault; refusing to amend or rehabilitate one’s behavior; deviant views; being overly belligerent and quarrelsome; creating the circumstances for a quarrel; maintaining overly close relations with nuns, unruly people, and ne’er-do-wells; and refusing to let go of a Dharma matter that has been peacefully resolved.\nacts of suspension\nsuspension 
ཕྱིར-འགྱེད-པའི-ལས	 One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha.\nacts of reconciliation\nreconciliation|One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha.\nacts of reconciliation\nreconciliation 
སྨད-པའི-ལས	 One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha.\nchastening|One of five types of disciplinary acts meted out by the saṅgha.\nchastening 
ལས-བརྗོད-པ	 After a petition is put to the saṅgha, a monk other than the petitioner must make a motion to act on the petition.\nmotions to act| After a petition is put to the saṅgha, a monk other than the petitioner must make a motion to act on the petition.\nmotions to act |After a petition is put to the saṅgha, a monk other than the petitioner must make a motion to act on the petition.\nmotions to act 
གསོལ-བ-འབའ-ཞིག-གི-ལས	 A formal act of the saṅgha in which the motion suffices, with no need to formally state the act. Such an act is employed before a candidate for ordination is asked about confidential matters pertaining to his fitness for ordination.\nacts of motion alone| A formal act of the saṅgha in which the motion suffices, with no need to formally state the act. Such an act is employed before a candidate for ordination is asked about confidential matters pertaining to his fitness for ordination.\nacts of motion alone |A formal act of the saṅgha in which the motion suffices, with no need to formally state the act. Such an act is employed before a candidate for ordination is asked about confidential matters pertaining to his fitness for ordination.\nacts of motion alone 
གསོལ-བ-དང-གཉིས-ཀྱི-ལས	 A formal act of the saṅgha that requires an initial motion followed by the statement of the proposed act. Such an act is needed to grant the vows of full ordination to a nun, among other occasions.\nacts whose second member is a motion| A formal act of the saṅgha that requires an initial motion followed by the statement of the proposed act. Such an act is needed to grant the vows of full ordination to a nun, among other occasions.\nacts whose second member is a motion |A formal act of the saṅgha that requires an initial motion followed by the statement of the proposed act. Such an act is needed to grant the vows of full ordination to a nun, among other occasions.\nacts whose second member is a motion 
གསོལ-བ-དང-བཞིའི-ལས	 A formal act of the saṅgha that requires an initial motion followed by the statement of the proposed act, repeated three times. Such an act is required for several proceedings—among other occasions, to fully ordain someone, or to officially threaten an intransigent monk, .\nacts whose fourth member is a motion| A formal act of the saṅgha that requires an initial motion followed by the statement of the proposed act, repeated three times. Such an act is required for several proceedings—among other occasions, to fully ordain someone, or to officially threaten an intransigent monk, .\nacts whose fourth member is a motion |A formal act of the saṅgha that requires an initial motion followed by the statement of the proposed act, repeated three times. Such an act is required for several proceedings—among other occasions, to fully ordain someone, or to officially threaten an intransigent monk, .\nacts whose fourth member is a motion 
ཡང-དག-པའི-ལས-ཀྱི-མཐའ	 Fourth of the noble eightfold path.| Fourth of the noble eightfold path. |Fourth of the noble eightfold path. 
བྱ-བ-གྲུབ-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས	 One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Amoghasiddhi.| One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Amoghasiddhi. |One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Amoghasiddhi. 
འཁོར-གསུམ	 These three aspects, literally “circles” or “provinces,” are the doer, the action, and the object of the action. Their purity is variously described as being free of self-interest or free of conceptualization.|These three aspects, literally “circles” or “provinces,” are the doer, the action, and the object of the action. Their purity is variously described as being free of self-interest or free of conceptualization. 
ལས-ཁ-ན-མ-ཐོ-བ-དང-བཅས-པ	actions that are tainted with the inadmissible transgressions\nactions which are tainted with the inadmissible transgressions
མཚམས-མེད-པ-ལྔ	 Five actions that bring immediate and severe consequences at death. The person will experience a rebirth in the lower realms directly after death. The five are: (1) killing one’s father, (2) killing one’s mother, (3) killing an arhat, (4) causing schism in the saṅgha, and (4) with evil intention making a buddha bleed.| The five actions with immediate results are: killing one’s mother, killing one’s father, killing an arhat, intentionally wounding a buddha, and creating a schism in the Saṅgha. |Describing the result of committing one of five particularly heinous crimes: (1) killing one’s father, (2) killing one’s mother, (3) killing an arhat, (4) maliciously drawing blood from a buddha, and (5) causing a schism in the sangha. In this sūtra, Mañjuśrī describes a corresponding set of five acts with immediate consequences that bodhisattvas should, in fact, perform. 
སྐྱེ-བ	 Eleventh of the twelve links of dependent origination.|Eleventh of the twelve links of dependent origination. 
མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱེད	actualized
མངོན-པར-གྲུབ	actualized
རྡོ-རྗེ-ལྟ-བུ	Name of the tenth meditative stability.
ཆོས-རྨད-དུ-བྱུང-བ	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means descriptions of miracles.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means descriptions of miracles.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
རབ-ཏུ-སྙིང-རྗེ-ཅན	 A Mahābrahmā in the southeast.|A Mahābrahmā in the southeast. 
ཉི-མ	 In the Vedas, the name originally meant “child of Aditi” so that in some texts it refers to a group of deities. However, in the Kāraṇḍavyūha it has the later meaning of being synonymous with Surya, the deity of the sun. It was translated into Tibetan simply as the common word for sun. | The god of the sun; the sun personified.| The god of the sun; the sun personified. |In the Vedas, the name originally meant “child of Aditi” so that in some texts it refers to a group of deities. However, in the Kāraṇḍavyūha it has the later meaning of being synonymous with Surya, the deity of the sun. It was translated into Tibetan simply as the common word for sun. 
ཉི-མའི-འབྱུང	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-ཆེན-པོས-བརྒྱན-པ	The name of the eon in which Śāriputra will become a buddha.
དམ-ཆོས-ཡིད-བཞིན-ནོར-བུ-ཐར-པ-རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-རྒྱན	 A celebrated text on the graduated path by Gampopa, also known as the Dakpo Thargyen ({dwags po thar rgyan}).| A celebrated text on the graduated path by Gampopa, also known as the Dakpo Thargyen ({dwags po thar rgyan}). |A celebrated text on the graduated path by Gampopa, also known as the Dakpo Thargyen ({dwags po thar rgyan}). 
ཀུན-ནས-ཉོན-མོངས-པ	 Saṃsāra, in being nothing but afflicted; its opposite is ‘fully cleansed,’ ‘complete purification.’| Saṃsāra, in being nothing but afflicted; its opposite is ‘fully cleansed,’ ‘complete purification.’ | The process of karma, afflictions of the mind, and suffering. |See “afflicted mental state.” 
ཉོན-མོངས	 Desire, hatred and anger, dullness, pride, and jealousy, as well as all their derivatives, said to number 84,000. Also translated “afflictions.”| Desire, hatred and anger, dullness, pride, and jealousy, as well as all their derivatives, said to number 84,000. Also translated “afflictions.” | Desire, hatred and anger, dullness, pride, and jealousy, as well as all their derivatives, said to number 84,000. Also translated “passions.” | Literally “pain,” “torment,” or “affliction.” In Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit it literally means “impurity” or “depravity.” In its technical use in Buddhism it means any negative quality in the mind that causes continued existence in saṃsāra. The basic three kleśas are ignorance, attachment, and aversion. | Literally “pain,” “torment,” or “affliction.” In Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit it means literally “impurity” or “depravity.” In its technical use in Buddhism it means any negative quality in the mind that causes continued existence in saṃsāra. The basic three kleśas are ignorance, attachment, and aversion.\naffliction | Negative qualities in the mind, the basic three being ignorance, attachment, and aversion. | The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions. |See “afflicted mental state.” 
ཀུན-ནས-ཉོང-མོངས-པ	 The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions.| The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions. |The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions. 
སེམས-ལས-བྱུང-བའི-ཉེ-བའི-ཉོན-མོངས-པ	 The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions.| The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions. |The essentially pure nature of mind is obscured and afflicted by various psychological defilements known as the afflicted mental states, which destroy the mind’s peace and composure. Included among them are the primary afflictions of fundamental ignorance, attachment, aversion, pride, doubt, and twenty subsidiary afflictions. 
ཉོན-མོངས-པ	 A type of mental imperfection. The most basic afflictions are attachment, aversion, and confusion. | The mental states which cause unrest in the mind, distorting the view of reality.| The mental states which cause unrest in the mind, distorting the view of reality. |A type of mental imperfection. The most basic afflictions are attachment, aversion, and confusion. 
ཉོན-མོངས-པ-མེད-པ-ཉོན-མོངས-པ-དང-བཅས-པ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡང-དག-པར-འདུ-བ	 Name of the 106th meditative stability.|Name of the 106th meditative stability. 
དངང-ལ-དངང-པར-འགྱུར	 afraid and terrified| afraid and terrified |afraid and terrified 
དངང	be afraid
དངང-བར-འགྱུར	 will be afraid|will be afraid 
ལུང	 The Mūlasarvāstivādin tradition grouped the Buddha’s early sūtra discourses into four divisions, or Āgama (Tib. mdo sde’i lung sde bzhi ): the Dīrghāgama (Tib. lung ring po ), the Madhyamāgama (Tib. lung bar ma ), the Ekottarikāgama (Tib. lung gcig las ’phros pa ), and the Saṃyuktāgama (Tib. lung dag ldan / yang dar par ldan pa’i lung ). They are more familiar to many English-speaking Buddhists through the translations of their Pali correlates: the Dīgha Nikāya, Majjhima Nikāya, Aṅguttara Nikāya, and the Samyutta Nikāya, for which see the Wisdom Publications titles: The Long Discourses of the Buddha, The Middle-Length Discourses of the Buddha, The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha, and The Connected Discourses of the Buddha, respectively.|The Mūlasarvāstivādin tradition grouped the Buddha’s early sūtra discourses into four divisions, or Āgama (Tib. mdo sde’i lung sde bzhi ): the Dīrghāgama (Tib. lung ring po ), the Madhyamāgama (Tib. lung bar ma ), the Ekottarikāgama (Tib. lung gcig las ’phros pa ), and the Saṃyuktāgama (Tib. lung dag ldan / yang dar par ldan pa’i lung ). They are more familiar to many English-speaking Buddhists through the translations of their Pali correlates: the Dīgha Nikāya, Majjhima Nikāya, Aṅguttara Nikāya, and the Samyutta Nikāya, for which see the Wisdom Publications titles: The Long Discourses of the Buddha, The Middle-Length Discourses of the Buddha, The Numerical Discourses of the Buddha, and The Connected Discourses of the Buddha, respectively. 
ཨ-ག-རུ	The resinous heartwood of the Aquilaria and Gyirnops evergreen trees in India and southeast Asia.
སྤྲ-བའི-མེ-ཏོག	Sesbania grandiflora.
ཕུང-པོ	 Five collections of similar dharmas, under which all compounded dharmas may be included; form, feeling, notions, factors, and consciousness. | Five collections or “heaps” of impersonal mental and physical elements (dharma). | Literally, “heaps,” or “aggregates.” These are the five aggregates of forms, sensations, identifications, mental activities, and consciousnesses.| Literally, “heaps,” or “aggregates.” These are the five aggregates of forms, sensations, identifications, mental activities, and consciousnesses. | See “aggregates.” | See “five psycho-physical aggregates.”\naggregate | The constituents that make up a being’s existence: form, sensations, identifications, mental activities, and consciousnesses. | The constituents that make up a being’s existence: forms, sensations, identifications, mental activities, and consciousnesses. Often translated “aggregate,” commonly in the context of the five aggregates. Along with dhātu and āyatana, one of the three major categories in the taxonomy of phenomena in the sūtra literature. | The psycho-physical components of personal experience. The five aggregates: form, feeling, perception, formative predispositions, and consciousness. | This translation of skandha is fairly well established, although some prefer the monosyllabic “group.” It is important to bear in mind that the original skandha has the sense of “pile,” or “heap,” which has the connotation of utter lack of internal structure, of a randomly collocated pile of things; thus “group” may convey a false connotation of structure and ordered arrangement. The five “compulsive” (upādāna) aggregates are of great importance as a schema for introspective meditation in the Abhidharma, wherein each is defined with the greatest subtlety and precision. In fact, the five terms rūpa, vedanā, samjñā, saṃskāra, and vijñāna have such a particular technical sense that many translators have preferred to leave them untranslated. Nevertheless, in the sūtra context, where the five are meant rather more simply to represent the relative living being (in the realm of desire), it seems preferable to give a translation—in spite of the drawbacks of each possible term—in order to convey the same sense of a total categorization of the psychophysical complex. Thus, for rūpa, “matter” is preferred to “form” because it more concretely connotes the physical and gross; for vedanā, “sensation” is adopted, as limited to the aesthetic; for samjñā, “intellect” is useful in conveying the sense of verbal, conceptual intelligence. For samskāra, which covers a number of mental functions as well as inanimate forces, “motivation” gives a general idea. And “consciousness” is so well established for vijñāna (although what we normally think of as consciousness is more like samjñā, i.e., conceptual and notional, and vijñāna is rather the “pure awareness” prior to concepts) as to be left unchallenged. |This translation of skandha is fairly well established, although some prefer the monosyllabic “group.” It is important to bear in mind that the original skandha has the sense of “pile,” or “heap,” which has the connotation of utter lack of internal structure, of a randomly collocated pile of things; thus “group” may convey a false connotation of structure and ordered arrangement. The five “compulsive” (upādāna) aggregates are of great importance as a schema for introspective meditation in the Abhidharma, wherein each is defined with the greatest subtlety and precision. In fact, the five terms rūpa, vedanā, samjñā, saṃskāra, and vijñāna have such a particular technical sense that many translators have preferred to leave them untranslated. Nevertheless, in the sūtra context, where the five are meant rather more simply to represent the relative living being (in the realm of desire), it seems preferable to give a translation—in spite of the drawbacks of each possible term—in order to convey the same sense of a total categorization of the psychophysical complex. Thus, for rūpa, “matter” is preferred to “form” because it more concretely connotes the physical and gross; for vedanā, “sensation” is adopted, as limited to the aesthetic; for samjñā, “intellect” is useful in conveying the sense of verbal, conceptual intelligence. For samskāra, which covers a number of mental functions as well as inanimate forces, “motivation” gives a general idea. And “consciousness” is so well established for vijñāna (although what we normally think of as consciousness is more like samjñā, i.e., conceptual and notional, and vijñāna is rather the “pure awareness” prior to concepts) as to be left unchallenged. 
ཟག-བཅས-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 An alternative name for the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-847.|An alternative name for the five acquisitive psycho-physical aggregates. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-847. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 First of the five definitive aggregates.| First of the five definitive aggregates. | One of the five undefiled aggregates (pañca anāsravaskandha, {zag med kyi phung po lnga}), also known as the five aggregates beyond the world (lokottaraskandha, {'jig rten las 'das pa'i phung po lnga}), the others being the aggregates of absorption (samādhi), insight (prajñā), liberation (vimukti), and liberated wisdom vision (vimuktijñānadarśana). | One of the five undefiled aggregates ({zag med kyi phung po lnga}), the others being the aggregates of concentration (samādhi), discriminative awareness (prajñā), liberation (vimukti), and insight of the primordial wisdom of liberation (vimukti­jñāna­darśana). |One of the five undefiled aggregates ({zag med kyi phung po lnga}), the others being the aggregates of concentration (samādhi), discriminative awareness (prajñā), liberation (vimukti), and insight of the primordial wisdom of liberation (vimukti­jñāna­darśana). 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-གྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 Second of the five definitive aggregates.| Second of the five definitive aggregates. |Second of the five definitive aggregates. 
འདུ-བྱེད-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 Fourth of the five psycho-physical aggregates.| Fourth of the five psycho-physical aggregates. |Fourth of the five psycho-physical aggregates. 
འདུ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 Third of the five psycho-physical aggregates.| Third of the five psycho-physical aggregates. |Third of the five psycho-physical aggregates. 
རྣམ-པར-གྲོལ-བའི-ཕུང-པོ	 Fourth of the five definitive aggregates.| Fourth of the five definitive aggregates. |Fourth of the five definitive aggregates. 
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཕུང-པོ	 Fifth of the five psycho-physical aggregates.| Fifth of the five psycho-physical aggregates. |Fifth of the five psycho-physical aggregates. 
ཚོར-བའི-ཕུང-པོ	 Second of the five psycho-physical aggregates.| Second of the five psycho-physical aggregates. |Second of the five psycho-physical aggregates. 
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 First of the five psycho-physical aggregates.|First of the five psycho-physical aggregates. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 Third of the five definitive aggregates.| Third of the five definitive aggregates. |Third of the five definitive aggregates. 
རྣམ-པར-གྲོལ-བའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-མཐོང-བའི-ཕུང-པོ	 Fifth of the five definitive aggregates.| Fifth of the five definitive aggregates. |Fifth of the five definitive aggregates. 
ཉེ-བར-ལེན-པའི-ཕུང-པོ	 Said of the aggregates individually, but more commonly in terms of all five as a collective, because they are “the basis of clinging to existence” (Edgerton). | The five skandhas seen as both caused by karma, and themselves the cause, through karma, of future existences.| The five skandhas seen as both caused by karma, and themselves the cause, through karma, of future existences. |Said of the aggregates individually, but more commonly in terms of all five as a collective, because they are “the basis of clinging to existence” (Edgerton). 
རྒ-ཤི	Twelfth of the twelve links of dependent origination.
རྒོད-པ	 Fifth of the five fetters associated with the higher realms.|Fifth of the five fetters associated with the higher realms. 
རྒོད-པ-དང-འགྱོད-པ	 One of the five obscurations.|One of the five obscurations. 
མེ-ལྷ	 The Vedic deity of fire. The name can also mean fire, particularly the sacrificial fire.|The Vedic deity of fire. The name can also mean fire, particularly the sacrificial fire. 
མེའི-རྫ-མ	 This might be a variation on the name for the third of the eight hot hells, the “crushing hell,” (Tib. {bsdus 'joms}, Skt. saṃghāta) as the name occurs in no other sūtra than the Kāraṇḍavyūha.|This might be a variation on the name for the third of the eight hot hells, the “crushing hell,” (Tib. {bsdus 'joms}, Skt. saṃghāta) as the name occurs in no other sūtra than the Kāraṇḍavyūha. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-ཆོས	 See “thirty-seven aids to enlightenment” | Thirty-seven practices that lead the practitioner to the awakened state: the four applications of mindfulness, the four thorough relinquishments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the eightfold path, and the seven branches of awakening.|See “thirty-seven aids to enlightenment” 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཕྱོགས-སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-བདུན-གྱི-ཆོས	 These consist of the four foci of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of magical powers, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the eightfold noble path.| These consist of the four foci of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of magical powers, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the eightfold noble path. |These consist of the four foci of mindfulness, the four right efforts, the four bases of magical powers, the five spiritual faculties, the five powers, the seven factors of enlightenment, and the eightfold noble path. 
ཨཱིར-བིར	 Synonymous with Kubera, who, in this sūtra, is distinct from Vaiśravaṇa. The name Ailavila is derived from his mother, and means “the son of Ilavilā.”|Synonymous with Kubera, who, in this sūtra, is distinct from Vaiśravaṇa. The name Ailavila is derived from his mother, and means “the son of Ilavilā.” 
གཞལ-མེད-ཁང	Vimāna, translated here as “airborne palace,” can mean a divine chariot or palace, or a combination of the two, as in this translation. These flying palaces of the deities are well known in Indian mythology. Burnouf translates as “chariots”; Kern has “aerial cars.”
མ-སྐྱེས-དགྲ	 A king of Magadha, the son of King Bimbisāra and Queen Vaidehī. He reigned during the last ten years of the Buddha’s life and about twenty years after. He overthrew his father and through invasion expanded the kingdom of Magadha. According to the Buddhist tradition he was murdered by his own son Udayabhadra.| A king of Magadha, the son of King Bimbisāra and Queen Vaidehī. He reigned during the last ten years of the Buddha’s life and about twenty years after. He overthrew his father and through invasion expanded the kingdom of Magadha. According to the Buddhist tradition he was murdered by his own son Udayabhadra. | The son of King Bimbisāra. |The son of King Bimbisāra. 
མི-ཕམ	 Name of a bodhisattva. Not to be confused with {mgon po mi pham}, Maitreya.| Name of a bodhisattva. Not to be confused with {mgon po mi pham}, Maitreya. | See “Ajita of the hair shawl.” |See “Ajita of the hair shawl.” 
མི-ཕམ-པ	 The other name of Maitreya (or Maitraka), the bodhisattva who will be the fifth buddha of the Good Eon.|The other name of Maitreya (or Maitraka), the bodhisattva who will be the fifth buddha of the Good Eon. 
བྱམས-པ	 A bodhisattva destined to be the buddha of the next epoch. | A bodhisattva present throughout the sūtra, prophesied as one birth away from buddhahood and designated by Śākyamuni as the next buddha in the succession of one thousand buddhas of our era. According to tradition, he resides in the Tuṣita heaven preparing for his descent to earth at the appropriate time which, according to Buddhist belief, will occur in 4456 A.D. | A synonym for Maitreya. | Bodhisattva of loving kindness; the next buddha to follow Śākyamuni.| Bodhisattva of loving kindness; the next buddha to follow Śākyamuni. | Bodhisattva. | First of the four immeasurable aspirations. | Literally, “The Loving One.” Name of the bodhisattva who will be the next buddha. | Name of a bodhisattva, believed to be the future buddha after Śākyamuni, the fifth buddha of this eon. | The bodhisattva who became Śākyamuni’s regent and is prophesied to be the next buddha, the fifth buddha in the Good Eon. In early Buddhism he appears as the human disciple sent to pay his respects by his teacher, and the Buddha gives him the gift a of a robe and prophesies that he will be the next buddha, and that his companion Ajita will be the next cakravartin. As a bodhisattva, he has both these names. In the White Lotus of Compassion Sūtra, Buddha Ratnagarbha prophesies that Vimalavaiśayana, the fourth of the thousand young Vedapāṭhaka pupils of Samudrareṇu, will be Buddha Maitreya. | The bodhisattva who became Śākyamuni’s regent and is prophesied to be the next buddha, the fifth buddha in the fortunate eon. In early Buddhism he appears as the human disciple Maitreya Tiṣya, sent to pay his respects by his teacher. The Buddha gives him the gift of a robe and prophesies he will be the next Buddha, while his companion Ajita will be the next cakravartin. As a bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna, he has both these names. |The bodhisattva who became Śākyamuni’s regent and is prophesied to be the next buddha, the fifth buddha in the Good Eon. In early Buddhism he appears as the human disciple sent to pay his respects by his teacher, and the Buddha gives him the gift a of a robe and prophesies that he will be the next buddha, and that his companion Ajita will be the next cakravartin. As a bodhisattva, he has both these names. In the White Lotus of Compassion Sūtra, Buddha Ratnagarbha prophesies that Vimalavaiśayana, the fourth of the thousand young Vedapāṭhaka pupils of Samudrareṇu, will be Buddha Maitreya. 
མ-ཕམ-པ	 The other name of Maitreya, the bodhisattva who became Śākyamuni’s regent and is prophesied to be the next buddha, the fifth buddha in the fortunate eon. In early Buddhism he appears as the human disciple Maitreya Tiṣya, sent to pay his respects by his teacher. The Buddha gives him the gift of a robe and prophesies he will be the next buddha, while his companion Ajita will be the next cakravartin. As a bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna he has both these names.|The other name of Maitreya, the bodhisattva who became Śākyamuni’s regent and is prophesied to be the next buddha, the fifth buddha in the fortunate eon. In early Buddhism he appears as the human disciple Maitreya Tiṣya, sent to pay his respects by his teacher. The Buddha gives him the gift of a robe and prophesies he will be the next buddha, while his companion Ajita will be the next cakravartin. As a bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna he has both these names. 
མི-ཕམ-སྐྲའི-ལ-བ-ཅན	 One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni.| One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. |One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. 
མི-ཕམ-སྒྲའི-ལ-བ-ཅན	 One of the six outsider teachers defeated by the Buddha at Śrāvastī.| One of the six outsider teachers defeated by the Buddha at Śrāvastī. |One of the six outsider teachers defeated by the Buddha at Śrāvastī. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-འཚོ-བ-པ	 A follower of a non-Buddhist mendicant movement.| A follower of a non-Buddhist mendicant movement. |A follower of a non-Buddhist mendicant movement. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-འཚོ-བའི-རིགས	 A tīrthika order|A tīrthika order 
ཀུན-ཤེས-ཀཽཎ-ཌི-ཉ	 Another name for Kauṇḍinya. As he was the first to understand the Buddha's teaching on the four truths, he received the name Ājñātakauṇḍinya (“Kauṇḍinya who understood”).|Another name for Kauṇḍinya. As he was the first to understand the Buddha's teaching on the four truths, he received the name Ājñātakauṇḍinya (“Kauṇḍinya who understood”). 
ཀུན-ཤེས-ཀཽཎྜིནྱ	 “Kauṇḍinya Who Understood.” Name of the first monk that Śākyamuni Buddha recognized as having understood his teachings.|“Kauṇḍinya Who Understood.” Name of the first monk that Śākyamuni Buddha recognized as having understood his teachings. 
ཀུན-ཤེས-ཀཽཎཌི-ཉ	 See “Kauṇḍinya.”|See “Kauṇḍinya.” 
ལ-ཕུག	Trachyspermum ammi.
འོག-མིན	 Fifth of the pure abodes, meaning “highest.” | Highest heaven of the form realm (rūpadhātu).| Highest heaven of the form realm (rūpadhātu). | The eighth and highest level of the Realm of Form (rūpadhātu, {gzugs khams}), and thus part of the world of the Brahmā gods (brahmaloka, {gtsang ris}); it is only accessible as the result of specific states of dhyāna. According to some texts this is where non-returners (anāgāmin) dwell in their last lives. In other texts it is the realm of the enjoyment body (saṃbhoga­kāya, {longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku}) and is a buddhafield associated with the Buddha Vairocana; it is accessible only to bodhisattvas on the tenth level.\n(See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-054-003.html#UT22084-054-003-67). | The highest heaven of the form-world, where a Buddha always receives the anointment of the ultimate wisdom, reaching there mentally from his seat of enlightenment under the Bodhi-tree. | The highest of the buddhafields. The term can be used to indicate the pure realm of the dharmakāya in general or can refer to the the six realms between the highest heaven of the form realm and the realm of dharmakāya. | The highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm. Within the form realm is the highest of the eight paradises of the fourth dhyāna. Within the fourth dhyāna is the highest of the five Śuddhāvāsika (“pure abode”) paradises. | The highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm. Within the form realm it is the highest of the eight paradises of the fourth dhyāna. Within the fourth dhyāna it is the highest of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises. |The eighth and highest level of the Realm of Form (rūpadhātu, {gzugs khams}), and thus part of the world of the Brahmā gods (brahmaloka, {gtsang ris}); it is only accessible as the result of specific states of dhyāna. According to some texts this is where non-returners (anāgāmin) dwell in their last lives. In other texts it is the realm of the enjoyment body (saṃbhoga­kāya, {longs spyod rdzogs pa'i sku}) and is a buddhafield associated with the Buddha Vairocana; it is accessible only to bodhisattvas on the tenth level.\n(See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-054-003.html#UT22084-054-003-67). 
ནམ-མཁའི-སྙིང-པོ	 A bodhisattva.| A bodhisattva. | An important bodhisattva, his name means “essence of space.” He is one of the “eight great close sons” (aṣṭa­mahopa­putra, {nye ba'i sras chen brgyad}). |An important bodhisattva, his name means “essence of space.” He is one of the “eight great close sons” (aṣṭa­mahopa­putra, {nye ba'i sras chen brgyad}). 
ནམ-མཁའ-ལ-གནས-པ	 A buddha in the southern direction.|A buddha in the southern direction. 
མི-ཕྱེད-པ	 (Indra)|(Indra) 
བློ-གྲོས-མི-ཟད-པ	 A bodhisattva in the assembly at Vimalakīrti’s house, often figuring in other Mahāyāna sūtras, especially Akṣayamati­nirdeśa­sūtra. | A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.| A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. |A bodhisattva in the assembly at Vimalakīrti’s house, often figuring in other Mahāyāna sūtras, especially Akṣayamati­nirdeśa­sūtra. 
མི-འཁྲུགས-པ	 Buddha of the universe Abhirati, presiding over the eastern direction; also prominent in tantric works as one of the five dhyāni buddhas, or tathāgatas (see Lamotte, pp. 360-362, n. 9). | Name of a buddha.| Name of a buddha. | Name of a tathāgata. | The buddha in the eastern realm of Abhirati. A well-known buddha in early Mahāyāna who became the head of one of the five buddha families, the eastern vajra family, in the higher tantras. | The buddha in the eastern realm, Abhirati. Akṣobhya, who in the higher tantras is the head of one the five buddha families, the vajra family in the east, was well-known early in the Mahāyāna tradition. | “Unmovable One.” |Buddha of the universe Abhirati, presiding over the eastern direction; also prominent in tantric works as one of the five dhyāni buddhas, or tathāgatas (see Lamotte, pp. 360-362, n. 9). 
མི-བསྐྱོད-པ	 A buddha of the east. | One of the five buddhas; in the system followed in the CMT, he is at the center of the maṇḍala.| One of the five buddhas; in the system followed in the CMT, he is at the center of the maṇḍala. |A buddha of the east. 
ལྕང-ལོ-ཅན	 The world of yakṣas ruled over by Kubera.|The world of yakṣas ruled over by Kubera. 
ཨཱ-ལི-ཀཱ-ལི	 The vowels (āli) and consonants (kāli) of the Sanskrit alphabet.|The vowels (āli) and consonants (kāli) of the Sanskrit alphabet. 
སེམས-གཞན-དུ-འགྱུར	be alienated\nis alienated\nalienated
གཞན-ཉིད-དུ-འགྱུར	be alienated\nis alienated\nalienated
སོམ-ཉི-ཐམས-ཅད-མགུ-བྱེད	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-འོད	 The eleventh bodhisattva level.|The eleventh bodhisattva level. 
ལུས-ཀྱི-ལས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡེ-ཤེས-སྔོན-དུ-འགྲོ-ཞིང-ཡེ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	 Thirteenth or sixteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Thirteenth or sixteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Thirteenth or sixteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
ཡིད-ཀྱི-ལས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡེ-ཤེས-སྔོན-དུ-འགྲོ-ཞིང-ཡེ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	 Fifteenth or eighteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Fifteenth or eighteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Fifteenth or eighteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
ངག-གི-ལས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡེ-ཤེས-སྔོན-དུ-འགྲོ-ཞིང-ཡེ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	 Fourteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Fourteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Fourteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
ཀུན-གཞི	 Here, probably the short form for ālayavijñāna. | Identifiable with ālayavijñāna. However, as reference to the elaborate Vijñānavādin psychology of the “store-consciousness” is out of place in this sūtra, it is here simply translated “subconsciousness.”|Literally, the foundation of all things of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa. Sometimes synonym for dharmakāya or emptiness. 
རབ-ཏུ-དབྱུང-བ	 allow me to go forth\nallow you to go forth\nallow him to go forth\nallow us to go forth\nallow them to go forth| allow me to go forth\nallow you to go forth\nallow him to go forth\nallow us to go forth\nallow them to go forth |allow me to go forth\nallow you to go forth\nallow him to go forth\nallow us to go forth\nallow them to go forth 
བསོད-སྙོམས-ཀྱི-ཟས	An acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཨ-རུ-ར	 Plant of the Himalayas believed to possess extraordinary healing properties as well as contribute to longevity. It is also believed to be very conducive to meditation practice. The Medicine Buddha is often depicted with a fruit or sprig of this plant. | Terminala chebula.| Terminala chebula. |Plant of the Himalayas believed to possess extraordinary healing properties as well as contribute to longevity. It is also believed to be very conducive to meditation practice. The Medicine Buddha is often depicted with a fruit or sprig of this plant. 
སྐྱུ-རུ-ར	 Emblic myrobalan, Phyllanthus emblica. | Phyllanthus emblica.| Phyllanthus emblica. |Phyllanthus emblica. 
སྣང-བ-མཐའ-ཡས	 More commonly known as Amitāyus in the sūtras, he is the buddha of the western realm of Sukhāvatī. Rebirth in that realm has been an important goal since early Mahāyāna.| More commonly known as Amitāyus in the sūtras, he is the buddha of the western realm of Sukhāvatī. Rebirth in that realm has been an important goal since early Mahāyāna. | The Buddha of boundless light; one of the five Tathāgatas in Tantrism; a visitor in Vimalakīrti’s house, according to the goddess’s report. |The Buddha of boundless light; one of the five Tathāgatas in Tantrism; a visitor in Vimalakīrti’s house, according to the goddess’s report. 
འོད-དཔག-མེད	 A buddha of the west; buddha of the Sukhāvatī buddhafield. | Buddha associated with Sukhāvatī; buddha of the western direction; principal buddha of the Pure Land tradition; as the bodhisattva Dharmākara, he made fourty-eight original vows (praṇidhāna) to bring beings to enlightenment, thus establishing Sukhāvatī for their benefit; in tantrism he is one of the five dhyāni-buddhas and is associated with the aggregate of notions (saṃjñā­skandha). | Buddha of the Sukhāvatī buddha field.| Buddha of the Sukhāvatī buddha field. | One of the five buddhas. |A buddha of the west; buddha of the Sukhāvatī buddhafield. 
འོད-དཔག-མད	 The buddha of the western realm of Sukhāvatī. In the sūtras more commonly known as Amitāyus.|The buddha of the western realm of Sukhāvatī. In the sūtras more commonly known as Amitāyus. 
འོད-དཔག-ཏུ-མེད-པ	 “Infinite Light.”|“Infinite Light.” 
རྒྱལ-མསཐན-དཔག-མེད	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཕུང-པོ-དཔག-མེད	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཚེ-དཔག-མེད	 Another name for Amitābha.| Another name for Amitābha. | Buddha especially associated with life energy and long life; the Sambhogakāya aspect of Amitābha.་Also a name of Amitābha. | The Buddha in the western realm of Sukhāvatī. Later and presently better known by his alternative name Amitābha. Not to be confused with the buddha of long life, Aparimitāyus, whose name has been incorrectly back-translated into Sanskrit as Amitāyus also. | The buddha in the realm of Sukhāvatī. Later and presently, he is better known by his alternative name, Amitābha. Not to be confused with the buddha of long life, Aparimitāyus, whose name has been incorrectly back-translated into Sanskrit as Amitāyus also. | The name of a buddha. |The name of a buddha. 
མཐོང-ན-དོན-ཡོད	 A bodhisattva who appears in Mahāyāna sūtras.|A bodhisattva who appears in Mahāyāna sūtras. 
མཐོང-བ-དོན-ཡོད	 Bodhisattva. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | One of “the sixteen excellent men.” |One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
དོན-ཡོད-རྒྱལ-པོ	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.|Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. 
དོན-ཡོད-གྲུབ-པ	 A buddha of the north. | One of the five buddhas.| One of the five buddhas. |A buddha of the north. 
དཔུང-མགོ-ཤིན-ཏུ-ཟླུམ-པོ	 Sixteenth of the thirty-two major marks.|Sixteenth of the thirty-two major marks. 
ཨ-མྲ-སྲུང-བ	 A courtesan of Vaiśālī who gave her garden to the Buddha and his retinue, where they stay during the events of the sūtra.|A courtesan of Vaiśālī who gave her garden to the Buddha and his retinue, where they stay during the events of the sūtra. 
ཨ-མྲས-བསྲུངས-པ	 A famous and beautiful patron of the Buddha's, courtesan in the city of Vaiśālī.|A famous and beautiful patron of the Buddha's, courtesan in the city of Vaiśālī. 
ཨ-མྲས-བསྲུངས-པའི-ཚལ-ཆེན-པོ	 The grove donated to the Buddha by the courtesan Āmrapālī.|The grove donated to the Buddha by the courtesan Āmrapālī. 
ཨཱ-མྲས-བསྲུངས-བའི-ཚལ	 The site in Vaiśālī where Buddha Śākyamuni taught and performed miracles.|The site in Vaiśālī where Buddha Śākyamuni taught and performed miracles. 
བདུད-རྩི	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.| A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. | The divine nectar that prevents death, often used metaphorically for the Dharma. | The divine nectar that prevents death. |The divine nectar that prevents death, often used metaphorically for the Dharma. 
ཨཱཎཱ	 Unidentified; occurs in a mantra of enthrallment.|Unidentified; occurs in a mantra of enthrallment. 
ཟིལ-གནོན	 Short form of Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū.|Short form of Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. 
བཀྲེས-ངབ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-མཐའ-ཡས	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཀུན-དགའ	 The Buddha’s nephew and attendant who recited the Buddha’s sūtra discourses from memory after the Buddha passed.|The Buddha’s nephew and attendant who recited the Buddha’s sūtra discourses from memory after the Buddha passed. 
ཀུན-དགའ-བོ	 A major śrāvaka disciple of the Buddha; his personal attendant. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-950 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-1055. | Buddha Sākyamuni’s cousin, who was his attendant for the last twenty years of his life. He was the subject of criticism and opposition from the monastic community after the Buddha’s passing, but eventually succeeded to the position of the patriarch of Buddhism in India after the passing of the first patriarch, Mahākāśyapa. | Buddha Śākyamuni’s cousin, who was his attendant for the last twenty years of his life. He was the subject of criticism and opposition from the monastic community after the Buddha’s passing, but eventually succeeded to the position of the patriarch of Buddhism in India after the passing of the first patriarch, Mahākaśyapa. | Disciple and attendant of Buddha Śākyamuni. | One of the Buddha's primary followers, compiler of the sūtras. | The Buddha’s cousin and attendant. | The buddha’s cousin and principal attendant. | The cousin and close attendant monk of the Buddha. | The personal attendant and cousin of the Buddha.| The personal attendant and cousin of the Buddha. | Śrāvaka arhat and attendant of the Buddha. | Śrāvaka arhat. |The buddha’s cousin and principal attendant. 
དགའ-བ	 Joy in general; the first of the four joys of sexual experience. | One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct.| One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. | Third of the four immeasurable aspirations. |Joy in general; the first of the four joys of sexual experience. 
དགའ-བའི-དཔལ	 A buddha of the zenith.|A buddha of the zenith. 
མཐའ-ཡས	 Another name of Śesa, the serpent upon whom Viṣṇu rests during the interlude between the destruction and recreation of the world.| Another name of Śesa, the serpent upon whom Viṣṇu rests during the interlude between the destruction and recreation of the world. | One of the eight nāga kings. | One of the principal nāga kings. Also known as Śeṣa or Anataśeṣa. Considered the source of Patañjali grammar in Buddhism. In Vaiśnavism he is the serpent that Viṣṇu rests upon in between the creations of worlds. |Another name of Śesa, the serpent upon whom Viṣṇu rests during the interlude between the destruction and recreation of the world. 
སྤྱོད-པ-མཐའ-ཡས	 One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra.|One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra. 
མཐའ-ཡས-དབྱངས	 The name of two separate buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja in previous lifetimes.|The name of two separate buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja in previous lifetimes. 
མཐའ-ཡས-བློ-གྲོས	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
མུ-ཁྱུད-མཐའ-ཡས	 King of Ujjayinī and father of Pradyota.|King of Ujjayinī and father of Pradyota. 
མཐའ-ཡས-གནོན	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
ཡོན-ཏན-རིན-ཆེན-མཐའ-ཡས-བཀོད-པ	 Lit. “infinite array of jewel-qualities.” A universe of Buddha Ratnavyūha, also mentioned in the Lalita­vistara­sūtra.|Lit. “infinite array of jewel-qualities.” A universe of Buddha Ratnavyūha, also mentioned in the Lalita­vistara­sūtra. 
མགོན-མེད-ཟས-སྦྱིན	 A principal benefactor of the Buddha; he was the wealthy banker who acquired the grove of Prince Jeta, i.e., Jeta Grove, and donated it to the Buddhist community.| A principal benefactor of the Buddha; he was the wealthy banker who acquired the grove of Prince Jeta, i.e., Jeta Grove, and donated it to the Buddhist community. | A wealthy patron who donated Jetavana Grove to the saṅgha. | Benefactor of the Buddha. |A wealthy patron who donated Jetavana Grove to the saṅgha. 
མགོན-མེད-པ-ལ-ཟས-སྦྱིན-པ	 Anāthapiṇḍada was a wealthy merchant in the town of Śrāvastī, who became a patron of Buddha Śākyamuni. He bought the Jeta Park there to be the Buddha’s first monastery. He is better known in the West by the alternative Pāli form Anāthapiṇḍika.\nAnāthapiṇḍika|Anāthapiṇḍada was a wealthy merchant in the town of Śrāvastī, who became a patron of Buddha Śākyamuni. He bought the Jeta Park there to be the Buddha’s first monastery. He is better known in the West by the alternative Pāli form Anāthapiṇḍika.\nAnāthapiṇḍika 
མགོན-མེད-ཟས-སྦྱིན-གྱི-ཀུན-དགའ-ར-བ	 Known also as Jetavana, this was an important early site for the Buddha’s growing community. Anāthapiṇḍada, a wealthy patron of the Buddha, purchased the park, located outside Śrāvasti, at great cost, purportedly covering the ground with gold, and donated it to the saṅgha. It was there that the Buddha spent several rainy seasons and gave discourses there that were later recorded as sūtras. It was also the site for one of the first Buddhist monasteries.|Known also as Jetavana, this was an important early site for the Buddha’s growing community. Anāthapiṇḍada, a wealthy patron of the Buddha, purchased the park, located outside Śrāvasti, at great cost, purportedly covering the ground with gold, and donated it to the saṅgha. It was there that the Buddha spent several rainy seasons and gave discourses there that were later recorded as sūtras. It was also the site for one of the first Buddhist monasteries. 
མཚོ-ཆེན-པོ-མ-དྲོས-པ	 Name of a lake.|Name of a lake. 
མ-དྲོས-པ	 The nāga king who is said to dwell in Lake Mansarovar near Kailash.| The nāga king who is said to dwell in Lake Mansarovar near Kailash. |The nāga king who is said to dwell in Lake Mansarovar near Kailash. 
ཨང-ག	 A kingdom on the southern bank of the Ganges (in modern day Bihar and Bengal) whose influence waned during the life of Śākyamūni Buddha at the hands of the kings of Magadha. Its capital was at Campā.|A kingdom on the southern bank of the Ganges (in modern day Bihar and Bengal) whose influence waned during the life of Śākyamūni Buddha at the hands of the kings of Magadha. Its capital was at Campā. 
ཨང-གའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 The King of Aṅga was the pre-eminent ruler in the eastern Gangetic region at the time of the Buddha’s birth. His defeat at the hands of Prince Bimbisāra of Magadha is narrated at the start of the Pravrajyāvastu.|The King of Aṅga was the pre-eminent ruler in the eastern Gangetic region at the time of the Buddha’s birth. His defeat at the hands of Prince Bimbisāra of Magadha is narrated at the start of the Pravrajyāvastu. 
ཙཎྜེ-མཧཱ-ཀྲོ-དྷ	 This seems to be an epithet of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.|This seems to be an epithet of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. 
ཞལ-ལ-ཁྲོ-གཉེར-གྱི-རིམ-པ-མེད-པ	 Thirty-ninth of the eighty minor marks.|Thirty-ninth of the eighty minor marks. 
ཨང-གི-ར	 The rishi who is said to have composed most of the fourth Veda, the Atharvaveda.|The rishi who is said to have composed most of the fourth Veda, the Atharvaveda. 
བརྩོན-པ-མི-གཏོང-བ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. | Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. |A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
བརྩོན-པའི-མི-འདོར	 Name of a bodhisattva.|Name of a bodhisattva. 
མ-འགགས-པ	 A śrāvaka disciple and cousin of the Buddha who was famed for his meditative prowess and superknowledges. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-940. | The Buddha’s cousin, and one of his ten principal pupils. Renowned for his clairvoyance.| The Buddha’s cousin, and one of his ten principal pupils. Renowned for his clairvoyance. |A śrāvaka disciple and cousin of the Buddha who was famed for his meditative prowess and superknowledges. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-940. 
མ-འགག-པ	 Śrāvaka arhat.|Śrāvaka arhat. 
འགགས-པ-མེད-པ	 Śrāvaka arhat.|Śrāvaka arhat. 
ལོང-བུ-རྣམས-མི-མངོན-པ	Thirteenth of the eighty minor marks.
ས-བླའི-ལྷ	 God who moves above the earth.|God who moves above the earth. 
ལྷ-མ-ཡིན	 A class of demi-gods. | A class of superhuman beings or demigods engendered and dominated by envy, ambition, and hostility, who are metaphorically described as being incessantly embroiled in a dispute with the gods over the possession of a magical tree. | Demi-gods, titans. | The asuras are the enemies of the devas, fighting with them for supremacy. | The asuras, sometimes called the demi-gods or titans, are the enemies of the devas, fighting with them for supremacy. They are powerful beings who live around Mount Sumeru, and are usually classified as belonging to the higher realms. | The titans who inhabit one of the six types of “worlds” (loka) that make up saṃsāra. | The traditional adversaries of the devas (gods) who are frequently portrayed in Brahmanical mythology as having a disruptive effect on cosmological and social harmony. | The traditional adversaries of the devas (gods) who are frequently portrayed in the Brahmanical mythology as having a disruptive effect on cosmological and social harmony. | Titan (see glossary, under “five states of existence”). | demi-god| demi-god |A class of superhuman beings or demigods engendered and dominated by envy, ambition, and hostility, who are metaphorically described as being incessantly embroiled in a dispute with the gods over the possession of a magical tree. 
དཔེ-མེད-བློ-གྲོས	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
སྤྲིན-མེད	 Tenth god realm of form, meaning “cloudless.”|Tenth god realm of form, meaning “cloudless.” 
མི-ཆེ-བ	 First of the pure abodes, meaning “slightest.”| First of the pure abodes, meaning “slightest.” | Tenth god realm of form, meaning “cloudless.” |Tenth god realm of form, meaning “cloudless.” 
མ-བསྙལ-བའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 The realm of Ānanda when he becomes a buddha as given in the prose. (An­avana­tā Dhvaja­vaijayantī in the verse.)|The realm of Ānanda when he becomes a buddha as given in the prose. (An­avana­tā Dhvaja­vaijayantī in the verse.) 
མ-བསྙལ-རྒྱལ-མཚན-རྒྱལ-བའི-བ-དན	 The realm of Ānanda when he becomes a buddha, as given in the verse. (An­avanāmita­vaijayantī in the prose.)|The realm of Ānanda when he becomes a buddha, as given in the verse. (An­avanāmita­vaijayantī in the prose.) 
བློ-གྲོས-དཔེ-མེད	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
སོག-མེད	 Nāga king who became a pupil of the Buddha.|Nāga king who became a pupil of the Buddha. 
ཨ-པ-མརྒ	 Achyranthes aspera.| Achyranthes aspera; the chaff tree. |Achyranthes aspera. 
ཐུར-སེལ	 One of the five vital airs, centered in the anus.|One of the five vital airs, centered in the anus. 
ཨ-པ-ར-ཛི	 Clitoria ternatea.|Clitoria ternatea. 
ཉི-འོག-གི-གོས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. Cloth from foreign countries to the west of Magadha, such as Aparānta (also Aparāntaka), an ancient kingdom in western India.
བ-གླང-སྤྱོད	 The western continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as “rich in the resources of cattle.”|The western continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as “rich in the resources of cattle.” 
བརྗེད-བྱེད	 A spirit that causes epilepsy. | Epileptic or otherwise, symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.| Epileptic or otherwise, symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011. | This is the name for epilepsy, but also refers to the demon that causes epilepsy and loss of consciousness, as in the Kāraṇḍavyūha. The Tibetan specifically means “causing forgetting.” |Epileptic or otherwise, symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011. 
ཆེད-དུ-བརྗོད-པའི-སྡེ	 Fifth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.|Fifth of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-མདོ-བཞི	 The main topic of this sūtra; known also in Tibetan by the synonym {bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi} (“the four seals of the [Buddha’s] teaching”), in Sanskrit caturmudrā (“the four seals”) or dṛṣṭi­nimitta­mudrā (“the seals that are the marks of the [Buddhist] view”).| The main topic of this sūtra; known also in Tibetan by the synonym {bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi} (“the four seals of the [Buddha’s] teaching”), in Sanskrit caturmudrā (“the four seals”) or dṛṣṭi­nimitta­mudrā (“the seals that are the marks of the [Buddhist] view”). |The main topic of this sūtra; known also in Tibetan by the synonym {bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi} (“the four seals of the [Buddha’s] teaching”), in Sanskrit caturmudrā (“the four seals”) or dṛṣṭi­nimitta­mudrā (“the seals that are the marks of the [Buddhist] view”). 
འགལ-བ-དང-འགོག-པ-མེད-པ	Name of the ninety-eighth meditative stability.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-ལྟ-བའི-དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ	 Fourth of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-953.| Fourth of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-953. |Fourth of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-953. 
ཚོར-བའི-རྗེས-སུ-ལྟ-བའི-དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ	 Second of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-951.| Second of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-951. |Second of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-951. 
ལུས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-ལྟ-བའི-དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ	 First of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-949.| First of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-949. |First of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-949. 
སེམས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-ལྟ-བའི-དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ	 Third of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-952.| Third of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-952. |Third of the four applications of mindfulness. For a description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-952. 
དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-བཞག-པ	 Four contemplations on (1) the body, (2) feelings, (3) mind, and (4) phenomena.| Four contemplations on (1) the body, (2) feelings, (3) mind, and (4) phenomena. | Four contemplations on: (1) the body, (2) feelings, (3) mind, and (4) phenomena. These four contemplations are part of the thirty-seven branches of awakening. |Four contemplations on: (1) the body, (2) feelings, (3) mind, and (4) phenomena. These four contemplations are part of the thirty-seven branches of awakening. 
དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ-བཞི	 A fundamental practice of Buddhist meditation: close application of mindfulness to the body, close application of mindfulness to feelings, close application of mindfulness to mind, and close application of mindfulness to phenomena.| A fundamental practice of Buddhist meditation: close application of mindfulness to the body, close application of mindfulness to feelings, close application of mindfulness to mind, and close application of mindfulness to phenomena. | The four applications of mindfulness are (1) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to the physical body, observes the physical body; (2) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to feelings, observes feelings; (3) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to the mind, observes the mind; and (4) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to phenomena, observes phenomena. In the present sūtra, these can be found listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-158 and detailed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-949. |The four applications of mindfulness are (1) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to the physical body, observes the physical body; (2) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to feelings, observes feelings; (3) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to the mind, observes the mind; and (4) the application of mindfulness which, with regard to phenomena, observes phenomena. In the present sūtra, these can be found listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-158 and detailed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-949. 
དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-གཞག-པ	 See “four applications of mindfulness.”| See “four applications of mindfulness.” | These are the stationing, or focusing, of mindfulness on the body, sensations, the mind, and things. These four form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment. |See “four applications of mindfulness.” 
དམིགས	 Also translated here as “apprehend.”| Also translated here as “apprehend.” |Also translated here as “focus on.” 
དམིགས-སུ-མེད-པ-ཉིད	 not apprehended| not apprehended |not apprehended 
དམིགས-སུ-མ-མཆིས-པ	 not apprehended| not apprehended |not apprehended 
མི-དམིགས-པ-ཉིད	 not apprehended| not apprehended |not apprehended 
མི-དམིགས-པའི-ཚུལ-དུ	 The expression “without apprehending anything” suggests that great bodhisattva beings should teach without perceiving anything as inherently existing. Lamotte, The Treatise on the Great Virtue of Wisdom, vol. IV, p. 1763, note 564, renders this term as “by a method of non-perceiving.”|The expression “without apprehending anything” suggests that great bodhisattva beings should teach without perceiving anything as inherently existing. Lamotte, The Treatise on the Great Virtue of Wisdom, vol. IV, p. 1763, note 564, renders this term as “by a method of non-perceiving.” 
དམིགས-པའི-ཚུལ-དུ	 The expression “in an apprehending manner” implies that ordinary persons perceive phenomena as inherently exisiting, whereas bodhisattvas are said to act and teach “without apprehending anything.” On the latter term, see respective glossary entry.|The expression “in an apprehending manner” implies that ordinary persons perceive phenomena as inherently exisiting, whereas bodhisattvas are said to act and teach “without apprehending anything.” On the latter term, see respective glossary entry. 
དམིགས-པའི-ཚུལ-གྱིས	 The expression “in an apprehending manner” implies that ordinary persons perceive phenomena as inherently exisiting, whereas bodhisattvas are said to act and teach “without apprehending anything.” On the latter term, see respective glossary entry.|The expression “in an apprehending manner” implies that ordinary persons perceive phenomena as inherently exisiting, whereas bodhisattvas are said to act and teach “without apprehending anything.” On the latter term, see respective glossary entry. 
དམིགས-སུ-མ-མཆི	 be unapprehended| be unapprehended |be unapprehended 
དམིགས-སུ-མེད	 be unapprehended| be unapprehended |be unapprehended 
དམིགས-སུ-མེད-པ	 be unapprehended| be unapprehended |be unapprehended 
མི-དམིགས-སུ-མེད	 be unapprehended| be unapprehended |be unapprehended 
དམིགས-པ-མེད	 be unapprehended| be unapprehended |be unapprehended 
མི-དམིགས-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Fifteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Fifteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Fifteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ཉེ-བར-གནས	 Also translated here as “approach” and “approximate.”\nbecome established in| Also translated here as “approach” and “approximate.”\nbecome established in | Also translated here as “become established in” and “approach.” | Also translated here as “become established in” and “approximate.” |Also translated here as “become established in” and “approximate.” 
ལེན-པ	 Also means “grasping” or “clinging;” but has a particular meaning as the ninth of the twelve links of dependent arising, between craving (tṛṣṇā, {sred pa}) and becoming or existence (bhava, {srid pa}). | Also means “grasping” or “clinging;” but has a particular meaning as the ninth of the twelve links of dependent arising, between craving (tṛṣṇā, {sred pa}) and becoming or existence (bhava, {srid pa}). In some texts, four types of appropriation are listed: of desire (rāga), of view (dṛṣṭi), of rules and observances as paramount (śīla­vrata­parāmarśa), and of belief in a self (ātmavāda). Only the first three are mentioned in this sūtra.\nappropriate | Ninth of the twelve links of dependent origination.|Also means “grasping” or “clinging;” but has a particular meaning as the ninth of the twelve links of dependent arising, between craving (tṛṣṇā, {sred pa}) and becoming or existence (bhava, {srid pa}). In some texts, four types of appropriation are listed: of desire (rāga), of view (dṛṣṭi), of rules and observances as paramount (śīla­vrata­parāmarśa), and of belief in a self (ātmavāda). Only the first three are mentioned in this sūtra.\nappropriate 
ཉེ-བར-ལེན-པ	 Also means “grasping” or “clinging;” but has a particular meaning as the ninth of the twelve links of dependent arising, between craving (tṛṣṇā, {sred pa}) and becoming or existence (bhava, {srid pa}). In some texts, four types of appropriation are listed: of desire (rāga), of view (dṛṣṭi), of rules and observances as paramount (śīla­vrata­parāmarśa), and of belief in a self (ātmavāda). Only the first three are mentioned in this sūtra.\nappropriate| Also means “grasping” or “clinging;” but has a particular meaning as the ninth of the twelve links of dependent arising, between craving (tṛṣṇā, {sred pa}) and becoming or existence (bhava, {srid pa}). In some texts, four types of appropriation are listed: of desire (rāga), of view (dṛṣṭi), of rules and observances as paramount (śīla­vrata­parāmarśa), and of belief in a self (ātmavāda). Only the first three are mentioned in this sūtra.\nappropriate |Also means “grasping” or “clinging;” but has a particular meaning as the ninth of the twelve links of dependent arising, between craving (tṛṣṇā, {sred pa}) and becoming or existence (bhava, {srid pa}). In some texts, four types of appropriation are listed: of desire (rāga), of view (dṛṣṭi), of rules and observances as paramount (śīla­vrata­parāmarśa), and of belief in a self (ātmavāda). Only the first three are mentioned in this sūtra.\nappropriate 
འཚད-མེད-འོད	 The second of the three paradises that are the second dhyāna paradises in the form realm.|The second of the three paradises that are the second dhyāna paradises in the form realm. 
དགེ-ཆུང	 Seventh god realm of form, meaning “little virtue.”| Seventh god realm of form, meaning “little virtue.” | The second of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. |The second of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. 
ལྷ-མོ	 In this sūtra, “apsaras” (or “apsarases” in plural) is synonymous with devī, the female equivalent of deva. In Indian culture, it is also the name for goddesses of the clouds and water, and the wives of the gandharvas.\napsarases | Popular figures in Indian culture, they are said to be goddesses of the clouds and water. | The “apsarases” are popular figures in Indian culture, they are said to be goddesses of the clouds and water and to be wives of the gandharvas. However, in the Kāraṇḍavyūha, they are presented as the female equivalent of the devas. Therefore the Tibetan has translated them as if the word were devī (“goddess’’).\napsarases| The “apsarases” are popular figures in Indian culture, they are said to be goddesses of the clouds and water and to be wives of the gandharvas. However, in the Kāraṇḍavyūha, they are presented as the female equivalent of the devas. Therefore the Tibetan has translated them as if the word were devī (“goddess’’).\napsarases |Popular figures in Indian culture, they are said to be goddesses of the clouds and water. 
ཙ-ཤ	 Sometimes also translated “goddess.”\n(Plural: “apsarases”).\napsarases|Sometimes also translated “goddess.”\n(Plural: “apsarases”).\napsarases 
ལྷའི-བུ-མོ	 A divine girl. | Celestial nymph. | Sometimes also translated “celestial maiden.”| Sometimes also translated “goddess” and “aspsaras” (plural: “apsarases”). |Sometimes also translated “goddess” and “aspsaras” (plural: “apsarases”). 
རྩིབས-ཀྱིས-འཕུར-ཚངས-བྱིན	 King of Śrāvastī and father of Prasenajit.| King of Śrāvastī and father of Prasenajit. |King of Śrāvastī and father of Prasenajit. 
ཨ-ར-པ-ཙ-ན	 The alphabet of the Kharoṣṭhī script, forming an important mnemonic incantation.| The alphabet of the Kharoṣṭhī script, forming an important mnemonic incantation. |The alphabet of the Kharoṣṭhī script, forming an important mnemonic incantation. 
སྐྱིལ-ཀྲུང-ཕྱེ-པ	 There are two versions of ardhaparyaṅka posture—one sitting, the other dancing. In the CMT, this term refers to the former.|There are two versions of ardhaparyaṅka posture—one sitting, the other dancing. In the CMT, this term refers to the former. 
དགྲ-བཅོམ-པ	 According to Buddhist tradition, one who has conquered his enemy passions (kleśa-ari-hata) and reached the supreme purity. The term can refer to buddhas as well as to those who have reached realization of the disciple vehicle. | Final goal of the śrāvaka practitioner. | Fourth of the four fruits attainable by śrāvakas. One who has eliminated all afflicted mental states and personally ended the cycle of rebirth.\narhatship | One who has achieved the fourth and final level of attainment on the śrāvaka path, and who has attained liberation with the cessation of all mental afflictions. | Sometimes translated “worthy one,” a term for one who is liberated and who has extirpated the passions (kleśa, {nyon mongs}).| Sometimes translated “worthy one,” a term for one who is liberated and who has extirpated the passions (kleśa, {nyon mongs}). | Used as both an epithet of the Buddha and the final accomplishment of early Buddhism, or the Hīnayāna. | Used as both as an epithet of the Buddha and the final accomplishment of early Buddhism, or the Hīnayāna.\narhathood\narhats | Used both as an epithet of the Buddha and to mean the final accomplishment of early Buddhism, or the Hīnayāna. | “Worthy one” or “someone who has killed his foes” (i.e., mental afflictions); a Buddhist saint who has obtained liberation. | “Worthy.” A being who has eliminated afflictive emotions and hence is liberated from suffering. The Tibetan, taking a doubtful Sanskrit etymology ari han, understands the term as “foe destroyer.” |According to Buddhist tradition, one who has conquered his enemy passions (kleśa-ari-hata) and reached the supreme purity. The term can refer to buddhas as well as to those who have reached realization of the disciple vehicle. 
རྟེན-ཅིང-འབྲེལ-བར-འབྱུང-བ	 In most contexts, this term is properly translated by “dependent origination.” But in the Mādhyamika context, wherein the concept of the ultimate nonorigination of all things is emphasized, “relativity” better serves to convey the message that things exist only in relation to verbal designation and that nothing exists as an independent, self-sufficient entity, even on the superficial level.| In most contexts, this term is properly translated by “dependent origination.” But in the Mādhyamika context, wherein the concept of the ultimate nonorigination of all things is emphasized, “relativity” better serves to convey the message that things exist only in relation to verbal designation and that nothing exists as an independent, self-sufficient entity, even on the superficial level. | See also “relativity.” | The central Buddhist doctrine that teaches how things are empty of self-nature and thus lack independent existence, yet exist provisionally insofar as they are created through the interaction of various causal factors.\ninterdependent origination | The relative nature of phenomena, which arises in dependence upon causes and conditions. Together with the four noble truths, this was the first teaching given by the Buddha. |The central Buddhist doctrine that teaches how things are empty of self-nature and thus lack independent existence, yet exist provisionally insofar as they are created through the interaction of various causal factors.\ninterdependent origination 
སྨོན-ལམ-ཐམས-ཅད-ལས-འབྱུང-བའི-རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-གཟི-བརྗིད-ཤིན-ཏུ-འཕགས-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
ཨརྫུ-ན	 Terminalia arjuna.| Terminalia arjuna. |Terminalia arjuna. 
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-ཡོངས-སུ-རྒྱས-པ	Twenty-ninth of the eighty minor marks.
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-ཇི-ལྟར-དགོངས-པ-བཞིན-དང-ལྡན-པ	Thirtieth of the eighty minor marks.
བཞེངས-བཞིན-དུ-མ-བཏུད-པར-ཕྱག-པུས-མོར-སླེབ-པ	Ninth of the thirty-two major marks.
དམག-རྣམ-པ-གཞི-དང-ལྡན-པ	 An army comprising elephants, chariots, cavalry, and infantry (Monier-Williams).|An army comprising elephants, chariots, cavalry, and infantry (Monier-Williams). 
རྩིབ-ལོགས-ཚ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
སྐྱ-རེངས	 Aruṇa is the deity of the dawn in Indian mythology, personified as the sun’s charioteer, and the name refers to the morning star Venus, according to de Visser (1931), p 24, n 1. In this context, Aruṇa functions as a messenger for Ākāśagarbha.|Aruṇa is the deity of the dawn in Indian mythology, personified as the sun’s charioteer, and the name refers to the morning star Venus, according to de Visser (1931), p 24, n 1. In this context, Aruṇa functions as a messenger for Ākāśagarbha. 
ཨ-རུ-ཎ	 The name of a star.|The name of a star. 
འཕགས-པ	 Generally has the common meaning of a noble person, one of a higher class or caste. In Dharma terms it means one who has gained the realization of the path and is superior for that reason. | Someone who has entered the “path of seeing,” i.e., who has a direct and stable realization of selflessness, ceases to be an “ordinary person” and becomes a noble one.| Someone who has entered the “path of seeing,” i.e., who has a direct and stable realization of selflessness, ceases to be an “ordinary person” and becomes a noble one. | The Sanskrit ārya generally has the common meaning of a noble person, one of a higher class or caste. In Dharma terms it means one who has gained the realization of the path and is superior for that reason. |The Sanskrit ārya generally has the common meaning of a noble person, one of a higher class or caste. In Dharma terms it means one who has gained the realization of the path and is superior for that reason. 
འཕགས-པ-ལྷ	 One of the great masters of Indian Buddhism. The main disciple of Nāgārjuna, he lived in the early a.d. centuries and wrote numerous important works of Mādhyamika philosophy.|One of the great masters of Indian Buddhism. The main disciple of Nāgārjuna, he lived in the early a.d. centuries and wrote numerous important works of Mādhyamika philosophy. 
འཕགས-པ-ཐོགས-མེད	 This great Indian philosopher lived in the fourth century and was the founder of the Vijñānavāda, or “Consciousness-Only,” school of Mahāyāna Buddhism.| This great Indian philosopher lived in the fourth century and was the founder of the Vijñānavāda, or “Consciousness-Only,” school of Mahāyāna Buddhism. |This great Indian philosopher lived in the fourth century and was the founder of the Vijñānavāda, or “Consciousness-Only,” school of Mahāyāna Buddhism. 
ཐོགས-མེད	 Fourth-century Indian founder of the Yogācāra tradition. | Indian commentator (fl. late fourth–early fifth centuries).| Indian commentator (fl. late fourth–early fifth centuries). | Indian master of the fourth century CE, and a major founder of the Yogācāra school of Buddhism. | This great Indian philosopher lived in the fourth century and was the founder of the Vijñānavāda, or “Consciousness-Only,” school of Mahāyāna Buddhism. |This great Indian philosopher lived in the fourth century and was the founder of the Vijñānavāda, or “Consciousness-Only,” school of Mahāyāna Buddhism. 
དབྱར-ཟླ-འབྲིང-པོ	 The month of Āṣāḍha.|The month of Āṣāḍha. 
ཤིང-ཀུན	 Ferula nartex, or Ferula foetida.|Ferula nartex (Boiss.), Ferula foetida (Regel.) 
གྲངས-མེད-པ	 The designation of a measure of time on the scale of eons, literally meaning “incalculable.” The number of years in such an eon differs in various sūtras that give a number. Also, twenty intermediate eons are said to be one incalculable eon, and four incalculable eons are one great eon. In that case those four incalculable eons represent the eons of the creation, presence, destruction, and absence of a world. Buddhas are often described as appearing in a second incalculable eon.| The designation of a measure of time on the scale of eons, literally meaning “incalculable.” The number of years in such an eon differs in various sūtras that give a number. Also, twenty intermediate eons are said to be one incalculable eon, and four incalculable eons are one great eon. In that case those four incalculable eons represent the eons of the creation, presence, destruction, and absence of a world. Buddhas are often described as appearing in a second incalculable eon. | This eon is literally called “incalculable” but nevertheless has a calculated span of time and therefore, to avoid confusion, its Sanskrit name is used here. The number of years in an asaṃkhyeya eon differs in various sūtras. Twenty “intermediate eons” are said to be one asaṃkhyeya eon, and four asaṃkhyeya eons are one great eon (mahākalpa). In that case those four asaṃkhyeya eons represent the eons of the creation, presence, destruction, and absence of a world. Therefore buddhas are often described as appearing in a second asaṃkhyeya eon. |This eon is literally called “incalculable” but nevertheless has a calculated span of time and therefore, to avoid confusion, its Sanskrit name is used here. The number of years in an asaṃkhyeya eon differs in various sūtras. Twenty “intermediate eons” are said to be one asaṃkhyeya eon, and four asaṃkhyeya eons are one great eon (mahākalpa). In that case those four asaṃkhyeya eons represent the eons of the creation, presence, destruction, and absence of a world. Therefore buddhas are often described as appearing in a second asaṃkhyeya eon. 
མིང-ངེས-པར-འཇུག-པ	Name of the sixty-sixth meditative stability.
དགེ-སྦྱོང	Specifically non-Vedic ascetics; śramaṇa ascetics are typically contrasted with brahmin householders.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-45.
ཕྱི-བཞིན-འབྲང-བའི-དགེ-སྦྱོང	 A kind of apprentice disciple.|A kind of apprentice disciple. 
སྦྱངས-པའི-ཡོན-ཏན	 An optional set of practices that monastics can adopt in order to cultivate greater detachment. The list of practices varies in different sources. When thirteen practices are listed, they consist of 1) wearing patched robes made from discarded cloth rather than from cloth donated by laypeople; 2) wearing only three robes; 3) going for alms; 4) not omitting any house while on the alms round, rather than begging only at those houses known to provide good food; 5) eating only what can be eaten in one sitting; 6) eating only food received in the alms bowl, rather than more elaborate meals presented to the Saṅgha; 7) refusing more food after indicating one has eaten enough; 8) dwelling in the forest; 9) dwelling at the root of a tree; 10) dwelling in the open air, using only a tent made from one’s robes as shelter; 11) dwelling in a charnel ground; 12) satisfaction with whatever dwelling one has; and 13) sleeping in a sitting position without ever lying down. | Ascetic practices that are optional for monks and nuns or undertaken only for a defined time period. They are traditionally listed as being twelve in number: (1) wearing rags (pāṃśukūlika, {phyag dar khrod pa}), (2) (in the form of only) three religious robes (traicīvarika, {chos gos gsum}), (3) (coarse in texture as) garments of felt (nāma[n]tika, {'phyings pa pa}), (4) eating by alms (paiṇḍapātika, {bsod snyoms pa}), (5) having a single mat to sit on (aikāsanika, {stan gcig pa}), (6) not eating after noon (khalu paścād bhaktika, {zas phyis mi len pa}), (7) living alone in the forest (āraṇyaka, {dgon pa pa}), (8) living at the base of a tree (vṛkṣamūlika, {shing drungs pa}), (9) living in the open (ābhyavakāśika, {bla gab med pa}), (10) frequenting cemeteries (śmāśānika, {dur khrod pa}), (11) sleeping sitting up (naiṣadika, {cog bu pa}), and (12) accepting whatever seating position is offered (yāthāsaṃstarika, {gzhi ji bzhin pa}); this last of the twelve is sometimes interpreted as not omitting any house on the almsround, i.e. regardless of any reception expected. Mahāvyutpatti, 1127-39.|An optional set of practices that monastics can adopt in order to cultivate greater detachment. The list of practices varies in different sources. When thirteen practices are listed, they consist of 1) wearing patched robes made from discarded cloth rather than from cloth donated by laypeople; 2) wearing only three robes; 3) going for alms; 4) not omitting any house while on the alms round, rather than begging only at those houses known to provide good food; 5) eating only what can be eaten in one sitting; 6) eating only food received in the alms bowl, rather than more elaborate meals presented to the Saṅgha; 7) refusing more food after indicating one has eaten enough; 8) dwelling in the forest; 9) dwelling at the root of a tree; 10) dwelling in the open air, using only a tent made from one’s robes as shelter; 11) dwelling in a charnel ground; 12) satisfaction with whatever dwelling one has; and 13) sleeping in a sitting position without ever lying down. 
བརྟུལ-ཞུགས-མཆོག-འཛིན	 Fourth of the four knots.| Fourth of the four knots. |Fourth of the four knots. 
ལྔ-སྡེ-བཟང-པོ	 The first five disciples of the Buddha Śakyamuni who had been his companions earlier during his period of ascetic practice.|The first five disciples of the Buddha Śakyamuni who had been his companions earlier during his period of ascetic practice. 
སྦྱངས-པའི-ཡོན-ཏན-བཅུ-གཉིས	 The twelve ascetic virtues comprise wearing clothing from a dust heap, owning only three robes, wearing felt or woolen clothes, begging for food, eating one’s meal at a single sitting, restricting the quantity of food, staying in solitude, sitting under trees, sitting in exposed places, sitting in charnel grounds, sitting even during sleep, and staying wherever one happens to be.\nFor the Sanskrit and Tibetan terms, see Mahā­vyutpatti 127–39; also Dudjom Rinpoche (1991), vol. 2: 169.| The twelve ascetic virtues comprise wearing clothing from a dust heap, owning only three robes, wearing felt or woolen clothes, begging for food, eating one’s meal at a single sitting, restricting the quantity of food, staying in solitude, sitting under trees, sitting in exposed places, sitting in charnel grounds, sitting even during sleep, and staying wherever one happens to be.\nFor the Sanskrit and Tibetan terms, see Mahā­vyutpatti 127–39; also Dudjom Rinpoche (1991), vol. 2: 169. | These consist of (1) wearing rags (pāṃśukūlika, {phyag dar khrod pa}), (2) (in the form of only) three religious robes (traicīvarika, {chos gos gsum}), (3) (coarse in texture as) garments of felt (nāma[n]tika, {'phyings pa pa}), (4) eating by alms (paiṇḍapātika, {bsod snyoms pa}), (5) having a single mat to sit on (aikāsanika, {stan gcig pa}), (6) not eating after noon (khalu paścād bhaktika, {zas phyis mi len pa}), (7) living alone in the forest (āraṇyaka, {dgon pa pa}), (8) living at the base of a tree (vṛkṣamūlika, {shing drungs pa}), (9) living in the open (not under a roof) (ābhyavakāśika, {bla gab med pa}), (10) frequenting burning grounds (Indian equivalent of cemeteries) (śmāśānika, {dur khrod pa}), (11) sleeping sitting up (in meditative posture) (naiṣadika, {cog bu pa}), and (12) accepting whatever seating position is offered (yāthāsaṃstarika, {gzhi ji bzhin pa}). Mahāvyutpatti, 1127-39. |These consist of (1) wearing rags (pāṃśukūlika, {phyag dar khrod pa}), (2) (in the form of only) three religious robes (traicīvarika, {chos gos gsum}), (3) (coarse in texture as) garments of felt (nāma[n]tika, {'phyings pa pa}), (4) eating by alms (paiṇḍapātika, {bsod snyoms pa}), (5) having a single mat to sit on (aikāsanika, {stan gcig pa}), (6) not eating after noon (khalu paścād bhaktika, {zas phyis mi len pa}), (7) living alone in the forest (āraṇyaka, {dgon pa pa}), (8) living at the base of a tree (vṛkṣamūlika, {shing drungs pa}), (9) living in the open (not under a roof) (ābhyavakāśika, {bla gab med pa}), (10) frequenting burning grounds (Indian equivalent of cemeteries) (śmāśānika, {dur khrod pa}), (11) sleeping sitting up (in meditative posture) (naiṣadika, {cog bu pa}), and (12) accepting whatever seating position is offered (yāthāsaṃstarika, {gzhi ji bzhin pa}). Mahāvyutpatti, 1127-39. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-དང-བརྟུལ-ཞུགས-མཆོག-ཏུ-འཛིན-པ	 Third of the three fetters; also fourth of the five fetters associated with the lower realms.| Third of the three fetters; also fourth of the five fetters associated with the lower realms. |Third of the three fetters; also fourth of the five fetters associated with the lower realms. 
སྐག	 Seventh lunar asterism.|Seventh lunar asterism. 
མྱ-ངན-མེད-པ	 A buddha of the south.| A buddha of the south. | Universe whence comes the Brahmā Śikhin. |Universe whence comes the Brahmā Śikhin. 
མྱ-ངན-འཚང	 Saraca asoca. The aromatic blossoms of this plant are clustered together as orange, yellow, and red bunches of petals.| Saraca asoca. The aromatic blossoms of this plant are clustered together as orange, yellow, and red bunches of petals. |Saraca asoca. The aromatic blossoms of this plant are clustered together as orange, yellow, and red bunches of petals. 
མྱ-ངན	 “Without Suffering.”| “Without Suffering.” |“Without Suffering.” 
མྱ-ངན-མེད-ཤིང	 Saraca indica.| Saraca indica. |Saraca indica. 
མྱ-ངན-མེད-པས-བྱིན	 A bodhisattva of the south.|A bodhisattva of the south. 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པ	 See “eight aspects of liberation.”|See “eight aspects of liberation.” 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཕྱོགས	 One of the qualities necessary as a method to attain the enlightenment of a śrāvaka, pratyeka­buddha, or buddha. There are thirty-seven of these: (1–4) mindfulness of body, sensations, mind, and phenomena; (5–8) the intention to not do bad actions that are not done, to give up bad actions that are being done, to do good actions that have not been done, and to increase the good actions that are being done; (9–12) the foundations for miraculous powers: intention, diligence, mind, and analysis; (13–17) five powers: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (18–22) five strengths: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (23–29) seven aspects of enlightenment: correct mindfulness, correct analysis of phenomena, correct diligence, correct attentiveness, correct samādhi, and correct equanimity; and (30–37) the eightfold noble path: right view, intention, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and samādhi.| One of the qualities necessary as a method to attain the enlightenment of a śrāvaka, pratyeka­buddha, or buddha. There are thirty-seven of these: (1–4) mindfulness of body, sensations, mind, and phenomena; (5–8) the intention to not do bad actions that are not done, to give up bad actions that are being done, to do good actions that have not been done, and to increase the good actions that are being done; (9–12) the foundations for miraculous powers: intention, diligence, mind, and analysis; (13–17) five powers: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (18–22) five strengths: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (23–29) seven aspects of enlightenment: correct mindfulness, correct analysis of phenomena, correct diligence, correct attentiveness, correct samādhi, and correct equanimity; and (30–37) the eightfold noble path: right view, intention, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and samādhi. | The qualities necessary as a method to attain the enlightenment of a śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, or buddha. There are thirty-seven of these: (1–4) the four kinds of mindfulness: mindfulness of body, sensations, mind, and phenomena; (5–8) the four correct exertions: the intention to not do bad actions that are not done, to give up bad actions that are being done, to do good actions that have not been done, and increase the good actions that are being done; (9–12) the foundations for miraculous powers: intention, diligence, mind, and analysis; (13–17) five powers: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (18–22) five strengths: an even stronger form of faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (23–29) seven limbs of enlightenment: correct mindfulness, correct wisdom of the analysis of phenomena, correct diligence, correct joy, correct serenity, correct samādhi, and correct equanimity; and (30–37) the eightfold noble path: right view, examination, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and samādhi. |The qualities necessary as a method to attain the enlightenment of a śrāvaka, pratyekabuddha, or buddha. There are thirty-seven of these: (1–4) the four kinds of mindfulness: mindfulness of body, sensations, mind, and phenomena; (5–8) the four correct exertions: the intention to not do bad actions that are not done, to give up bad actions that are being done, to do good actions that have not been done, and increase the good actions that are being done; (9–12) the foundations for miraculous powers: intention, diligence, mind, and analysis; (13–17) five powers: faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (18–22) five strengths: an even stronger form of faith, diligence, mindfulness, samādhi, and wisdom; (23–29) seven limbs of enlightenment: correct mindfulness, correct wisdom of the analysis of phenomena, correct diligence, correct joy, correct serenity, correct samādhi, and correct equanimity; and (30–37) the eightfold noble path: right view, examination, speech, action, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and samādhi. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Also rendered here as “branches of genuine enlightenment.” See “seven branches of enlightenment.”\nbranch of enlightenment\nbranches of genuine enlightenment\nbranch of genuine enlightenment | Mindfulness, discrimination, diligence, joy, pliability, absorption, and equanimity. | See “seven limbs of awakening.” | The branches of, respectively, (1) authentic mindfulness; (2) authentic discrimination of dharmas; (3) authentic perseverance; (4) authentic joy; (5) authentic serenity; (6) authentic meditative absorption; and (7) authentic equanimity. | The seven aspects of enlightenment are: mindfulness, analysis of phenomena, diligence, joy, tranquility, samādhi, and equanimity. | There are seven limbs of enlightenment: correct mindfulness, correct wisdom of the analysis of phenomena, correct diligence, correct joy, correct serenity, correct samādhi, and correct equanimity.| There are seven limbs of enlightenment: correct mindfulness, correct wisdom of the analysis of phenomena, correct diligence, correct joy, correct serenity, correct samādhi, and correct equanimity. |The seven aspects of enlightenment are: mindfulness, analysis of phenomena, diligence, joy, tranquility, samādhi, and equanimity. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-ཆོས-སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-བདུན	 The thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment comprise the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-158–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-165.\nFor a summary of the relevant Pāli and Sanskrit sources on all see the extensive discussion in Dayal (1932): 80–164.| The thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment comprise the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-158–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-165.\nFor a summary of the relevant Pāli and Sanskrit sources on all see the extensive discussion in Dayal (1932): 80–164. |The thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment comprise the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous ability, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, and the noble eightfold path. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-158–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-165.\nFor a summary of the relevant Pāli and Sanskrit sources on all see the extensive discussion in Dayal (1932): 80–164. 
སྨོན-པ-ཡོད-པ	 have aspiration\nhave aspirations| have aspiration\nhave aspirations |have aspiration\nhave aspirations 
ཚད-མེད	 See “four immeasurable aspirations.”\nimmeasurable aspirations|See “four immeasurable aspirations.”\nimmeasurable aspirations 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སེམས	 In normative Mahāyāna doctrine, bodhicitta refers to the awakened mind both in its relative and aboslute aspects. In tantric thought it is frequently used as a code word for semen in the context of its generation and manipulation in sexual yogic rites. | The determination to attain unsupassable, truly complete enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings. | The intent to obtain buddhahood to benefit all sentient beings; the practices towards buddhahood; the realization of emptiness. | This term has developed further meanings such as the ultimate bodhicitta of realizing emptiness, but in this sūtra it is used with its basic meaning. | “Spirit” is preferred to “mind” because the mind of enlightenment should rather be the mind of the Buddha, and to “thought” because a “thought of enlightenment” can easily be produced without the initiation of any sort of new resolve or awareness. “Will” also serves very well here.| “Spirit” is preferred to “mind” because the mind of enlightenment should rather be the mind of the Buddha, and to “thought” because a “thought of enlightenment” can easily be produced without the initiation of any sort of new resolve or awareness. “Will” also serves very well here. |This term has developed further meanings such as the ultimate bodhicitta of realizing emptiness, but in this sūtra it is used with its basic meaning. 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པའི-སྒོ-སྨོན-པ-མེད-པ	 Third of the three gateways to liberation.\naspirationlessness that is a gateway to liberation| Third of the three gateways to liberation.\naspirationlessness that is a gateway to liberation |Third of the three gateways to liberation.\naspirationlessness that is a gateway to liberation 
གཡོག-འཁོར	 Also translated here as “assembly.”|Also translated here as “retinue.” 
འཁོར-བཞི	 Male and female lay followers, and male and female monastic followers.| This denotes the assemblies of fully ordained monks and nuns, along with laymen and laywomen. |Male and female lay followers, and male and female monastic followers. 
འཁོར-བཞི-པོ	 Male and female monastics and males and females holding lay vows.|Male and female monastics and males and females holding lay vows. 
གསུང-ནི-འཁོར-དང-འཐུན-པར-ཁྱབ-པར-མཛད-ཀྱི-འཁོར-གྱི-ཕྱི-རོལ-དུ-གསུང-མི-འགྲོ	 Sixty-eighth of the eighty minor marks.| Sixty-eighth of the eighty minor marks. |Sixty-eighth of the eighty minor marks. 
སྦྱོར	To associate something with something.
མི-འཇིགས-པ	 See “fourfold fearlessness.” | The Buddha has four fearlessnesses, as do the bodhisattvas. The four fearlessnesses of the Buddha are: fearlessness regarding the realization of all things; fearlessness regarding knowledge of the exhaustion of all impurities; fearlessness of foresight through ascertainment of the persistence of obstructions; and fearlessness in the rightness of the path leading to the attainment of the supreme success. The fearlessnesses of the bodhisattva are: fearlessness in teaching the meaning he has understood from what he has learned and practiced; fearlessness resulting from the successful maintenance of purity in physical, verbal, and mental action—without relying on others’ kindness, being naturally flawless through his understanding of the absence of self; fearlessness resulting from freedom from obstruction in virtue, in teaching, and in delivering living beings, through the perfection of wisdom and liberative art and through not forgetting and constantly upholding the teachings; and fearlessness in the ambition to attain full mastery of omniscience—without any deterioration or deviation to other practices—and to accomplish all the aims of all living beings.\nfearlessnesses | This refers to the four confidences or fearlessnesses of the Buddha: confidence in having attained realization, confidence in having attained elimination, confidence in teaching the Dharma, and confidence in teaching the path of aspiration to liberation.| This refers to the four confidences or fearlessnesses of the Buddha: confidence in having attained realization, confidence in having fully eliminated all defilements, confidence in teaching the Dharma, and confidence in teaching the path of aspiration to liberation. |The four kinds of assurance of a tathāgata (catur­vaiśāraya, {mi 'jigs pa bzhi}) are: 1) assurance concerning complete awakening (abhi­sambodhi­vaiśāradya, {thams cad mkhyen pa la mi 'jigs pa}); 2) assurance concerning the destruction of the impurities (āsravakṣaya­vaiśāradya, {zag pa zad pa mkhyen pa la mi 'jigs pa}); 3) assurance concerning harmful things (antarāyika­dharma­vaiśāradya, {bar du gcod pa'i chos la mi 'jigs pa}); 4) assurance concerning the path that leads to emancipation (nairyāṇika­pratipad­vaiśāradya, {thob par 'gyur bar nges par 'byung ba'i lam la mi 'jigs pa}). (See Rahula 2001: 230, in which they are called “perfect self-confidence”). 
དབུགས-མི-བདེ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
རྟ-ཐུལ	 One of the Five Excellent Companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. He was renowned for his pure conduct and holy demeanor so Buddha sent him to attract Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana to the order. | One of the first five disciples of the Buddha.| One of the first five disciples of the Buddha. | One of the five ascetics who became the first disciples of the Buddha. | The son of one of the seven brahmins who predicted that Śākyamuni would become a great king. He was one of the five companions with Śākyamuni in the beginning of his spiritual path, abandoning him when he gave up asceticism, but then becoming one of his first five pupils after his buddhahood. He was the last of the five to attain the realization of a “stream entrant” and became an arhat on hearing the Sūtra on the Characteristics of Selflessness (An­ātma­lakṣaṇa­sūtra), which was not translated into Tibetan. Aśvajit was the one who converted Śariputra and Maudgalyāyana into becoming followers of the Buddha. |One of the five ascetics who became the first disciples of the Buddha. 
འགྲོ-མགྱོགས	 One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct.|One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. 
མི-གདུང	 The fourth highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the fourth of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises.|The fourth highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the fourth of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises. 
མི-གདུང-པ	 Second of the pure abodes, meaning “painless.”|Second of the pure abodes, meaning “painless.” 
ཨཱ-ཏི-ཤ	 (982-1055). Perhaps the last of the universally acclaimed masters of Indian Buddhism, he was extremely influential in Tibetan Buddhism, as he spent the last seventeen years of his life in Tibet, bringing many important teachings and aiding in the work of correction of teachings translated earlier.|(982-1055). Perhaps the last of the universally acclaimed masters of Indian Buddhism, he was extremely influential in Tibetan Buddhism, as he spent the last seventeen years of his life in Tibet, bringing many important teachings and aiding in the work of correction of teachings translated earlier. 
ཇོ-བོ-རྗེ	 The Bengali Buddhist master (980–1054) who came to Tibet, and whose pupils founded the Kadampa tradition.|The Bengali Buddhist master (980–1054) who came to Tibet, and whose pupils founded the Kadampa tradition. 
ཨ-ཏི-ཤ	 Atiśa Dīpaṃkara­śrī­jñāna (982–1054 C.E.), often referred to in Tibetan as {jo bo}, “(The) Lord,” was a renowned figure in the history of Tibetan Buddhism famous for coming to Tibet and revitalizing Buddhism there during the early eleventh century.|Atiśa Dīpaṃkara­śrī­jñāna (982–1054 C.E.), often referred to in Tibetan as {jo bo}, “(The) Lord,” was a renowned figure in the history of Tibetan Buddhism famous for coming to Tibet and revitalizing Buddhism there during the early eleventh century. 
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-འདོད-ཆགས	 First of the five fetters associated with the higher realms.| First of the five fetters associated with the higher realms. |First of the five fetters associated with the higher realms. 
གཟུགས-མེད-པའི-འདོད-ཆགས	 Second of the five fetters associated with the higher realms.| Second of the five fetters associated with the higher realms. |Second of the five fetters associated with the higher realms. 
རྒྱུན-དུ-ཞུགས-པ	 A person who has entered the “stream” of practice that leads to nirvāṇa. The first of the four attainments of the path of the hearers. | First of four stages in the path to nirvāṇa.\nentered the stream | One who has achieved the first of the four levels of attainment on the śrāvaka path, and who is from then onwards continuously approaching liberation.| One who has entered the “stream” to nirvāṇa; one of the fruits of the Śrāvakayāna. | The four stages of spiritual accomplishment are stream entrant, once-returner, non-returner, and arhat. |The first level of noble ones when practicing the path of the hearers. 
རྣམ-པ-མངོན-པར-བསྒྲུབ-པ	 Name of the eighty-third meditative stability.| Name of the eighty-third meditative stability. |Name of the eighty-third meditative stability. 
ཡིད-ལ-བྱེད-པ	 Also translated here as “attention.”\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-862).|Also translated here as “attentiveness.”\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-862). 
དྲན-པ	 Also translated in this sūtra as “attention.”| Also translated in this sūtra as “attention.” | Also translated in this sūtra as “recollection.” | One of the most important trainings for the Buddhist practitioner. Traditionally taught within the teachings on the four applications of mindfulness. | This is the faculty which enables the mind to maintain its attention on a referent object, counteracting the arising of forgetfulness, which is a great obstacle to meditative stability. Together with alertness, mindfulness is one of the two indispensable factors for the development of calm abiding. |Also translated in this sūtra as “recollection.” 
བསྡུ-བའི-དངོས-པོ-བཞི	 Generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches.| Generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches. | See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1941. |See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1941. 
འོད	 Also translated here as “aureole.”|Also translated here as “light.” 
འོད-འདོམ-གང-མཉམ-པ	 Sixty-third of the eighty minor marks.| Sixty-third of the eighty minor marks. |Sixty-third of the eighty minor marks. 
འོད-འདོམ-གང-བ	 Either the thirtieth of, or a supplement to, the thirty-two major marks.| Either the thirtieth of, or a supplement to, the thirty-two major marks. |Either the thirtieth of, or a supplement to, the thirty-two major marks. 
ལེགས-པའི-བློ-གྲོས	 The ninth bodhisattva bhūmi.| The ninth bodhisattva level. |The ninth bodhisattva level. 
བསྐལ-པ-བཟང-པོ	 A cosmological era that has buddhas appear in it.| A cosmological era that has buddhas appear in it. | Name of the present eon of time, during which one thousand buddhas appear in succession, Śākyamuni being the fourth and Maitreya the fifth. |Name of the present eon of time, during which one thousand buddhas appear in succession, Śākyamuni being the fourth and Maitreya the fifth. 
མཚན-དང-དཔེ-བྱད-བཟང-པོ	 The thirty-two signs and the eighty marks of a superior being.|The thirty-two signs and the eighty marks of a superior being. 
ཡོ-བྱད-བསྙུངས-པ	The Tibetan means literally “the lessening of requisites.”
སྣང-འོད	 A deity in the retinue of Śakra.|A deity in the retinue of Śakra. 
སྣང-བ-ཐོབ-པ	 “Attainment of Light,” the world in which Kāśyapa will become a buddha.|“Attainment of Light,” the world in which Kāśyapa will become a buddha. 
རྟོགས-པ-བརྗོད-པ	 As one of the twelve aspects of Dharma, it means stories of previous lives of beings.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|As one of the twelve aspects of Dharma, it means stories of previous lives of beings.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
ཀ-ལ-པིང-ཀ	 Also called red avadavats, strawberry finches, and kalaviṅka sparrows. Dictionaries have erroneously identified them as cuckoos, and kalaviṅka birds outside India have evolved into a mythical half human bird. The avadavat is a significant bird in the Ganges plain and renowned for its beautiful song.|Several species of finch belonging to the genus Amandava, part of the Estrildid finch family (Estrildidae). They are renowned as songbirds, and in Tibetan texts the Sanskrit kalaviṅka was sometimes simply transliterated ka la ping ka, sometimes translated as khu byug, “cuckoo." 
ཁུ-བྱུག	Several species of finch belonging to the genus Amandava, part of the Estrildid finch family (Estrildidae). They are renowned as songbirds, and in Tibetan texts the Sanskrit kalaviṅka was sometimes simply transliterated ka la ping ka, sometimes translated as khu byug, “cuckoo."
ཀུན-འདར-མ	 The prāṇa channel in the centre of the body.|The prāṇa channel in the centre of the body. 
སྤྱན-རས-གཟིགས	 Bodhisattva of compassion. | First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvati­vyūha. The name has been variously interpreted. “The lord of Avalokita,” Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” One of the principal sūtras in the Mahā­sāṃghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” by the buddhas. In the early tantras he was one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. The Potalaka Mountain in South India became important in Southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not feature in the Kāraṇḍa­vyūha. | The deified bodhisattva of compassion; one of the original sixteen bodhisattvas.| The deified bodhisattva of compassion; one of the original sixteen bodhisattvas. |First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvati­vyūha. The name has been variously interpreted. “The lord of Avalokita,” Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” One of the principal sūtras in the Mahā­sāṃghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” by the buddhas. In the early tantras he was one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. The Potalaka Mountain in South India became important in Southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not feature in the Kāraṇḍa­vyūha. 
སྤྱན-རས-གཟིགས-ཀྱི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 A bodhisattva emblematic of the great compassion; of great importance in Tibet as special protector of the religious life of the country and in China, in female form, as Kwanyin, protectress of women, children, and animals.|A bodhisattva emblematic of the great compassion; of great importance in Tibet as special protector of the religious life of the country and in China, in female form, as Kwanyin, protectress of women, children, and animals. 
སྤྱན-རས-གཟིགས-དབང-ཕྱུག	 A bodhisattva who first appears in the Sukhāvatī­vyūha sūtra (Toh 115) and then in a number of other Mahāyāna sūtras such as the Sad­dharma­puṇḍarīka (Toh 113). Avalokiteśvara develops into a great bodhisattva who embodies compassion with multiple forms in Indian, Chinese, and Tibetan Buddhism. | Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. | First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvati Sūtra. The name has been variously interpreted. In “The lord of Avalokita,” Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” One of the principal sūtras in the Mahāsāṃghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” by the buddhas. In the early tantras, he was one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. The Potalaka Mountain in southern India became important in southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not yet feature in the Kāraṇḍa­vyūha Sūtra, which emphasized the premeninence of Avalokiteśvara above all buddhas and bodhisattvas and introduced the mantra oṁ maṇi­padme hūṁ. | First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvativyūha. The name has been variously interpreted. “The lord of Avalokita,” Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” One of the principal sūtras in the Mahāsamghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” by the buddhas. In the early tantras, he was one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. The Potalaka Mountain in South India became important in Southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not feature in the Kāraṇḍavyūha. | First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvatī Sūtra. The name has been variously interpreted. In “The lord of Avalokita,” Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” One of the principal sūtras in the Mahāsamghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” by the buddhas. In the early tantras, he is one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. The Potalaka Mountain in southern India became important in Southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not yet feature in the http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html (Toh 116), which emphasized the preeminence of Avalokiteśvara above all buddhas and bodhisattvas and introduced the mantra oṃ maṇipadme hūṃ. |First appeared as a bodhisattva beside Amitābha in the Sukhāvatī Sūtra. The name has been variously interpreted. In “The lord of Avalokita,” Avalokita has been interpreted as “seeing,” although, as a past passive participle, it is literally “lord of what has been seen.” One of the principal sūtras in the Mahāsamghika tradition was the Avalokita Sūtra, which has not been translated into Tibetan, in which the word is a synonym for enlightenment, as it is “that which has been seen” by the buddhas. In the early tantras, he is one of the lords of the three families, as the embodiment of the compassion of the buddhas. The Potalaka Mountain in southern India became important in Southern Indian Buddhism as his residence in this world, but Potalaka does not yet feature in the http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html (Toh 116), which emphasized the preeminence of Avalokiteśvara above all buddhas and bodhisattvas and introduced the mantra oṃ maṇipadme hūṃ. 
ཕལ-པོ-ཆེ	 This vast Mahāyāna sūtra (also called the Buddhāvataṃsaka) deals with the miraculous side of the Mahāyāna. It is important in relation to the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, since the latter’s fifth chapter, “The Inconceivable Liberation,” is a highly abbreviated version of the essential teaching of the former.|This vast Mahāyāna sūtra (also called the Buddhāvataṃsaka) deals with the miraculous side of the Mahāyāna. It is important in relation to the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa, since the latter’s fifth chapter, “The Inconceivable Liberation,” is a highly abbreviated version of the essential teaching of the former. 
མནར-མེད	 The lowest hell, the eighth of the eight hot hells. | The lowest hell, translated in two different ways within the sūtra and in the Mahāvyutpatti concordance, although {mnar med} became the standard form.| The lowest hell, translated in two different ways within the sūtra and in the Mahāvyutpatti concordance, although {mnar med} became the standard form. | The lowest hell; the eighth of the eight hot hells. |The lowest hell; the eighth of the eight hot hells. 
བསྟིར-མེད	 The lowest hell, translated in two different ways within the sūtra and in the Mahāvyutpatti concordance, although {mnar med} became the standard form.|The lowest hell, translated in two different ways within the sūtra and in the Mahāvyutpatti concordance, although {mnar med} became the standard form. 
མི-ཆེ	 The fifth highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the fifth of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises.|The fifth highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the fifth of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises. 
སངས-རྒྱས	 Also rendered "buddha." | Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni and general way of addressing the enlightened ones.| Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni and general way of addressing the enlightened ones. | Lit. “awakened one.” Title of one who has attained the highest attainment possible for a living being. “The Buddha” often designates Śākyamuni because he is the Buddha mainly in charge of the buddhafield of our Sahā universe. | Sometimes also translated “awakened one.” |Also rendered "buddha." 
རིག-པ	 A type of incantation or spell used to accomplish a ritual goal. This can be associated with either ordinary attainments or those whose goal is awakening. | In different contexts in this text, also translated as “knowledge.” | In different contexts in this text, also translated as “spell.” | This term may generally by synonymous with intelligence or mental aptitude, but it also conveys the meaning of science or branches of knowledge, and of pure awareness. In this last sense, it denotes the fundamental innate mind in its natural state of spontaneity and purity, beyond alternating states of motion and rest and the subject-object dichotomy.|This term may generally by synonymous with intelligence or mental aptitude, but it also conveys the meaning of science or branches of knowledge, and of pure awareness. In this last sense, it denotes the fundamental innate mind in its natural state of spontaneity and purity, beyond alternating states of motion and rest and the subject-object dichotomy. 
བག-ཡོད-པ	 This denotes a type of awareness of the most seemingly insignificant aspects of practical life, an awareness derived as a consequence of the highest realization of the ultimate nature of reality. As it is stated in the Anavatapta­nāga­rāja­paripṛcchā­sūtra (Toh 156): “He who realizes voidness, that person is consciously aware.” “Ultimate realization,” far from obliterating the relative world, brings it into highly specific, albeit dreamlike, focus.|This denotes a type of awareness of the most seemingly insignificant aspects of practical life, an awareness derived as a consequence of the highest realization of the ultimate nature of reality. As it is stated in the Anavatapta­nāga­rāja­paripṛcchā­sūtra (Toh 156): “He who realizes voidness, that person is consciously aware.” “Ultimate realization,” far from obliterating the relative world, brings it into highly specific, albeit dreamlike, focus. 
ཤེས-རབ	 A mind that sees the ultimate truth directly. | Also translated here as “wisdom.” See glossary entry. | In specific contexts, it refers also to the female partner in sexual yoga. | In the context‌ of the transcendent perfections, wisdom is the sixth of the six transcendent perfections.\nThe translation of prajñā ({shes rab}) by “wisdom” here defers to the precedent established by Edward Conze in his writings. It has a certain poetic resonance which more accurate renderings—“discernment,”, “discriminative awareness,” or “intelligence”—unfortunately lack. It should be remembered that in Abhidharma, prajñā is classed as one of the five object-determining mental states (pañca­viṣaya­niyata, {yul nges lnga}), alongside “will,” “resolve,” “mindfulness,” and “meditative stability.” Following A­saṅga’s Abhi­dharma­sam­uccaya, Jamgon Kongtrul (TOK, Book 6, Pt. 2, p. 498), defines prajñā as “the discriminative awareness that analyzes specific and general characteristics.” Therefore “wisdom” in this context is to be understood in the cognitive or analytical Germanic sense of witan or weis (Dayal 1932: 136) and not as an abstract “body of knowledge,” or in any aloof and mysterious theosophical sense. Nor indeed is there any association with the Greek sophia.\nAlso translated here as “discriminative awareness.”| In the context‌ of the transcendent perfections, wisdom is the sixth of the six transcendent perfections.\nThe translation of prajñā ({shes rab}) by “wisdom” here defers to the precedent established by Edward Conze in his writings. It has a certain poetic resonance which more accurate renderings—“discernment,”, “discriminative awareness,” or “intelligence”—unfortunately lack. It should be remembered that in Abhidharma, prajñā is classed as one of the five object-determining mental states (pañca­viṣaya­niyata, {yul nges lnga}), alongside “will,” “resolve,” “mindfulness,” and “meditative stability.” Following A­saṅga’s Abhi­dharma­sam­uccaya, Jamgon Kongtrul (TOK, Book 6, Pt. 2, p. 498), defines prajñā as “the discriminative awareness that analyzes specific and general characteristics.” Therefore “wisdom” in this context is to be understood in the cognitive or analytical Germanic sense of witan or weis (Dayal 1932: 136) and not as an abstract “body of knowledge,” or in any aloof and mysterious theosophical sense. Nor indeed is there any association with the Greek sophia.\nAlso translated here as “discriminative awareness.” |Also translated here as “wisdom.” See glossary entry. 
རིག-པ-གཉིས	 The two modes of awareness are intrinsic and extraneous. In this context‌, the former may indicate the awareness of one’s own mind and the latter the awareness of the minds of others.|The two modes of awareness are intrinsic and extraneous. In this context‌, the former may indicate the awareness of one’s own mind and the latter the awareness of the minds of others. 
རིག-པ-གསུམ	 As indicated in the Dharma­saṃ­gīti­sūtra (Toh. 238, mdo sde, dza, 42a), these comprise the awareness of clairvoyance ({lha'i mig gi rig pa}), the awareness that recollects past abodes ({sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa'i rig pa}), and the awareness of the cessation of contaminants ({zag pa zad pa'i rig pa}). See Nordrang Orgyan (2008): 428. | Knowledge through divine sight ({lha'i mig gi shes pa}), knowledge through remembering past lives ({sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa'i rig pa}), and the knowledge that defilements have ceased ({zag pa zad pa'rig pa}).|As indicated in the Dharma­saṃ­gīti­sūtra (Toh. 238, mdo sde, dza, 42a), these comprise the awareness of clairvoyance ({lha'i mig gi rig pa}), the awareness that recollects past abodes ({sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa'i rig pa}), and the awareness of the cessation of contaminants ({zag pa zad pa'i rig pa}). See Nordrang Orgyan (2008): 428. 
སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 In Buddhism one way of describing experience (or being) is in terms of the twelve sense fields (eye and form, ear and sound, nose and odor, tongue and taste, body and touch, mind and mental objects). | One way of describing experience and the world in terms of twelve sense fields (eye and form, ear and sound, nose and odor, tongue and taste, body and touch, mind and mental objects). | Sometimes translated “sense-fields” or “bases of cognition,” the term usually refers to the six sense faculties and their corresponding objects, i.e. the first twelve of the eighteen dhātu. Along with skandha and dhātu, one of the three major categories in the taxonomy of phenomena in the sūtra literature. | The six senses and their respective objects. | The six “inner” sense organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue, tactile sense, and mind), and their respective six “outer” objects of forms, sounds, smells, flavors, tactile objects, and mental objects, are sometimes called collectively the “six sense sources” (q.v.), but are also sometimes taken as two separate groups, making twelve. | The subjective and objective polarities of sense perception. | The twelve bases of perception are divided into two groups, consisting of six inner and six outer bases. These are six sense faculties and six outer corresponding objects. Together they are the causes for the production of the six sense consciousnesses. | The twelve bases of sensory perception: the six sensory faculties (eyes, nose, ears, tongue, body, and mind), which form in the womb and eventually have contact with the six external bases of sensory perception: form, smell, sound, taste, touch, and mental phenomena. | The twelve sense-media are eye-medium (cakṣurāyatana), form-medium (rūpa-), ear-medium (śrotra-), sound-medium (śabda-), nose-medium (ghrāna-), scent-medium (gandha-), tongue-medium (jihvā-), taste-medium (rasa-), body-medium (kāya-), texture-medium (spraṣṭavya), mental-medium (mana-), and phenomena-medium (dharmāyatana). In some passages they are enumerated as six, the object-faculty pair being taken as one, and it is this set of six that is the fifth member of the twelve links of dependent origination. The word āyatana is usually translated as “base,” but the Skt., Tib., and Ch. all indicate “something through which the senses function” rather than a basis from which they function; hence “medium” is suggested. | There are twelve bases of cognition in all: the five physical sense organs plus the mind and their respective six sorts of objects. The six inner bases from eye to mind are what apprehend; and the six outer bases from form to mental objects are the objects that are apprehended. | Twelve collections of similar dharmas, under which all compounded and uncompounded dharmas may be included: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind, and their objects: visible forms, sounds, smells, flavors, touchables, and dharmas.| Twelve collections of similar dharmas, under which all compounded and uncompounded dharmas may be included: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, mind, and their objects: visible forms, sounds, smells, flavors, touchables, and dharmas. |In Buddhism one way of describing experience (or being) is in terms of the twelve sense fields (eye and form, ear and sound, nose and odor, tongue and taste, body and touch, mind and mental objects). 
ཚད-མེད-འོད	 Fifth god realm of form, meaning “immeasurable radiance.”|Fifth god realm of form, meaning “immeasurable radiance.” 
ཚད-མེད-དགེ	 Eighth god realm of form, meaning “immeasurable virtue.”|Eighth god realm of form, meaning “immeasurable virtue.” 
མྱ-ངན-མེད	 Mauryan emperor (304–232 B.C.E.).|Mauryan emperor (304–232 B.C.E.). 
ངན-སོང	 Also translated here as “inferior realms.”\nlower realm| Also translated here as “inferior realms.”\nlower realm | Also translated here as “lower realms.”\ninferior realm |The three bad migrations are those of (1) denizens of hells, (2) inhabitants of the “limbo” of the pretaloka, where one wanders as an insatiably hungry and thirsty wretch, and (3) animals, who are trapped in the pattern of mutual devouring (Tib. {gcig la gcig za}). 
བཀཀུ-ལ	 From a wealthy brahmin family, Bakkula is said to have become a monk at the age of eighty and lived to be a hundred and sixty! He is also said to have had two families, because as a baby he was swallowed by a large fish and the family who discovered him alive in the fish’s stomach also claimed him as their child. The Buddha’s foremost pupil in terms of health and longevity. It is also said he could remember many previous lifetimes and was a pupil of the previous buddhas Padmottara, Vipaśyin, and Kāśyapa.|From a wealthy brahmin family, Bakkula is said to have become a monk at the age of eighty and lived to be a hundred and sixty! He is also said to have had two families, because as a baby he was swallowed by a large fish and the family who discovered him alive in the fish’s stomach also claimed him as their child. The Buddha’s foremost pupil in terms of health and longevity. It is also said he could remember many previous lifetimes and was a pupil of the previous buddhas Padmottara, Vipaśyin, and Kāśyapa. 
བ-ཀུ-ལ	 A yakṣa lord. | Indian tree with a very fine flower. | Śrāvaka arhat; one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”).| Śrāvaka arhat; one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”). |Indian tree with a very fine flower. 
སྟོབས-ལྔ	 As listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-163, these comprise (1) the power of faith, (2) the power of perseverance, (3) the power of recollection, (4) the power of meditative stability, and (5) the power of wisdom. | Faith, dilligence, mindfulness, absorption, and knowledge. Although the same as the faculties, they are termed “powers” due to their greater strength. | For the five strengths, see “powers.” The ten strengths can refer either to one set of ten qualities of tathāgatas, or to a different list of ten strengths of bodhisattvas. | The five strengths are a stronger form of the five powers: faith, mindfulness, diligence, samādhi, and wisdom.| The five strengths are a stronger form of the five powers: faith, mindfulness, diligence, samādhi, and wisdom. | These are the same as the five spiritual faculties, at a further stage of development. |These are the same as the five spiritual faculties, at a further stage of development. 
སྟོབས-ལྡན	 A leader of the asuras.|A leader of the asuras. 
སྟོབས	 The strengths are enumerated as five or ten. As five, they are a stronger form of the five powers: faith, mindfulness, diligence, samādhi, and wisdom. As ten, they are the strenths of knowing what is proper and improper, knowing the maturation of karma, knowing the variety of beings’ aspirations, knowing the variety of their inclinations, knowing the variety of their capacities, knowing everywhere each path leads, knowing the dhyānas, liberations, samāpattis, samādhis and so forth, being able to recall previous states of being, and knowing the details of death and rebirth.| The strengths are enumerated as five or ten. As five, they are a stronger form of the five powers: faith, mindfulness, diligence, samādhi, and wisdom. As ten, they are the strenths of knowing what is proper and improper, knowing the maturation of karma, knowing the variety of beings’ aspirations, knowing the variety of their inclinations, knowing the variety of their capacities, knowing everywhere each path leads, knowing the dhyānas, liberations, samāpattis, samādhis and so forth, being able to recall previous states of being, and knowing the details of death and rebirth. | The ten powers (daśabala, {stobs bcu}) of the Tathāgata are 1) the power of knowledge of what is possible and what is not possible (sthānāsthāna­jñāna­bala, {gnas dang gnas ma yin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 2) the power of knowledge of the individual results of actions (karmasvaka­jñāna­bala, {las kyi rnam smin mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 3) the power of knowledge of different practices leading to various destinies (sarvatra­gāminī­prati­pajjñāna­bala, {thams cad du 'gro ba'i lam mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 4) the power of knowledge of the different dispositions and tendencies of different beings (aneka­dhātu­nānā­dhātu­jñāna­bala, {khams sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 5) the power of knowledge of the different aspirations of beings (nānādhi­mukti­jñāna­bala, {mos pa sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 6) the power of knowledge of the different degrees of development of the faculties and inclinations of beings (indriya­parāparya­jñānabala, {dbang po mchog dang mchog ma yin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 7) the power of knowledge of the absorptions, deliverances, concentrations, and attainments (dhyāna­vimokṣa­samādhi­samāpatti­jñāna­bala, {bsam gtan dang rnam thar dang ting nge 'dzin dang snyoms par 'jug pa thams cad mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 8) the power of knowledge of previous lives (pūrva­nivāsa­jñāna­bala, {sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 9) the power of knowledge of the deaths and births of beings according to their actions (cyutyu­papāda­jñāna­bala, {'chi 'pho bo dang skye ba mkhyen pa'i stobs}); and 10) the power of knowledge of the destruction of the impurities (āsravakṣaya­jñāna­bala, {zag pa zad pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}). (Rahula 2001: 229–230, n118). |The ten powers (daśabala, {stobs bcu}) of the Tathāgata are 1) the power of knowledge of what is possible and what is not possible (sthānāsthāna­jñāna­bala, {gnas dang gnas ma yin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 2) the power of knowledge of the individual results of actions (karmasvaka­jñāna­bala, {las kyi rnam smin mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 3) the power of knowledge of different practices leading to various destinies (sarvatra­gāminī­prati­pajjñāna­bala, {thams cad du 'gro ba'i lam mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 4) the power of knowledge of the different dispositions and tendencies of different beings (aneka­dhātu­nānā­dhātu­jñāna­bala, {khams sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 5) the power of knowledge of the different aspirations of beings (nānādhi­mukti­jñāna­bala, {mos pa sna tshogs mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 6) the power of knowledge of the different degrees of development of the faculties and inclinations of beings (indriya­parāparya­jñānabala, {dbang po mchog dang mchog ma yin pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 7) the power of knowledge of the absorptions, deliverances, concentrations, and attainments (dhyāna­vimokṣa­samādhi­samāpatti­jñāna­bala, {bsam gtan dang rnam thar dang ting nge 'dzin dang snyoms par 'jug pa thams cad mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 8) the power of knowledge of previous lives (pūrva­nivāsa­jñāna­bala, {sngon gyi gnas rjes su dran pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}); 9) the power of knowledge of the deaths and births of beings according to their actions (cyutyu­papāda­jñāna­bala, {'chi 'pho bo dang skye ba mkhyen pa'i stobs}); and 10) the power of knowledge of the destruction of the impurities (āsravakṣaya­jñāna­bala, {zag pa zad pa mkhyen pa'i stobs}). (Rahula 2001: 229–230, n118). 
སྟོབས-ཀྱི-འཁོར-ལོས-སྒྱུར-བ	 A cakravartin is a king who rules over at least one continent, and gains his territory by the rolling of his magic wheel over the land. Therefore he is called a “king with the revolving wheel.” This is as the result of the merit he has accumulated in previous lifetimes. A bala­cakra­vartin king is a lesser kind of cakravartin who has attained his dominion through his great might and his powerful army.|A cakravartin is a king who rules over at least one continent, and gains his territory by the rolling of his magic wheel over the land. Therefore he is called a “king with the revolving wheel.” This is as the result of the merit he has accumulated in previous lifetimes. A bala­cakra­vartin king is a lesser kind of cakravartin who has attained his dominion through his great might and his powerful army. 
གཏོར-མ	 A ritual offering of food and drink.| A ritual offering of food and drink. | Bali wrested control of the world from the devas, establishing a period of peace and prosperity with no caste distinction. Indra requested Viṣṇu to use his wiles so that the devas could gain the world back from him. He appeared as a dwarf asking for two steps of ground, was offered three, and then traversed the world in two steps. Bali, keeping faithful to his promise, accepted the banishment of the asuras into the underworld. A great festival is held in Bali’s honor annually in South India. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha, he abuses his power by imprisoning the kṣatriyas, so that Viṣṇu has cause to banish him to the underworld. | Ritual oblation offered into the fire. |A ritual offering of food and drink. 
སྟོབས-ཅན	 Bali wrested control of the world from the devas, establishing a period of peace and prosperity with no caste distinction. Indra requested Viṣṇu to use his wiles so that the devas could gain the world back from him. He appeared as a dwarf asking for two steps of ground, was offered three and then traversed the world in two steps. Bali, keeping faithful to his promise, accepted the banishment of the asuras into the underworld. A great Bali festival in his honor is held annually in southern India. In http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html (Kāraṇḍa­vyūha Sūtra, Toh 116), he is described as abusing his power by imprisoning the kṣatriyas, so that Viṣṇu has just cause to banish him to the underworld.| Bali wrested control of the world from the devas, establishing a period of peace and prosperity with no caste distinction. Indra requested Viṣṇu to use his wiles so that the devas could gain the world back from him. He appeared as a dwarf asking for two steps of ground, was offered three and then traversed the world in two steps. Bali, keeping faithful to his promise, accepted the banishment of the asuras into the underworld. A great Bali festival in his honor is held annually in southern India. In http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html (Kāraṇḍa­vyūha Sūtra, Toh 116), he is described as abusing his power by imprisoning the kṣatriyas, so that Viṣṇu has just cause to banish him to the underworld. |Bali wrested control of the world from the devas, establishing a period of peace and prosperity with no caste distinction. Indra requested Viṣṇu to use his wiles so that the devas could gain the world back from him. He appeared as a dwarf asking for two steps of ground, was offered three and then traversed the world in two steps. Bali, keeping faithful to his promise, accepted the banishment of the asuras into the underworld. A great Bali festival in his honor is held annually in southern India. In http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html (Kāraṇḍa­vyūha Sūtra, Toh 116), he is described as abusing his power by imprisoning the kṣatriyas, so that Viṣṇu has just cause to banish him to the underworld. 
འོད-མའི-ཚལ	 The park of Veṇuvana was the first settled residence specifically dedicated to the Buddhist saṅgha, offered to the Buddha by King Bimbisāra of Magadha.|The park of Veṇuvana was the first settled residence specifically dedicated to the Buddhist saṅgha, offered to the Buddha by King Bimbisāra of Magadha. 
འོད-མའི-ཚལ-བྱ-ཀ-ལན-ད-ཀ-གནས-པ	 A park or garden near Rājagṛha, the setting for a number of sūtras. The Tibetan rendering [{'od ma'i tshal}] {bya ka lan da ka} makes it clear that the Tibetans considered the kalandaka to be a kind of bird ({bya}), while Sanskrit and Pali sources generally agree that it is a kind of squirrel. It is therefore likely that this word refers to the Indian flying squirrel, Petaurista philippensis.| A park or garden near Rājagṛha, the setting for a number of sūtras. The Tibetan rendering [{'od ma'i tshal}] {bya ka lan da ka} makes it clear that the Tibetans considered the kalandaka to be a kind of bird ({bya}), while Sanskrit and Pali sources generally agree that it is a kind of squirrel. It is therefore likely that this word refers to the Indian flying squirrel, Petaurista philippensis. |A park or garden near Rājagṛha, the setting for a number of sūtras. The Tibetan rendering [{'od ma'i tshal}] {bya ka lan da ka} makes it clear that the Tibetans considered the kalandaka to be a kind of bird ({bya}), while Sanskrit and Pali sources generally agree that it is a kind of squirrel. It is therefore likely that this word refers to the Indian flying squirrel, Petaurista philippensis. 
བན-དེ	 A Middle Indic word derived from the Sanskrit bhadanta. Meaning “venerable one” it is a term of respectful title for Buddhist monks. | A term of respect for Buddhist monks: bande in Tibet and Nepal, bhante in the Pali tradition. A middle-Indic word, it is said to be derived from vande, the BHS vocative form of the Sanskrit vanda, meaning praiseworthy or venerable, although bhante is said to be a contraction of the vocative bhadante, derived from a respectful salutation. | The general term from ancient India for any member of the ordained Buddhist saṅgha.|A Middle Indic word derived from the Sanskrit bhadanta. Meaning “venerable one” it is a term of respectful title for Buddhist monks. 
བནྡྷུ	 Pentapetes Phoenicea; bandhūka flower because of its rich red color is a standard of comparison for anything colored red.|Pentapetes Phoenicea; bandhūka flower because of its rich red color is a standard of comparison for anything colored red. 
ནྱ-གྲོ-དྷའི-ཀུན-དགའ-ར-བ	 The Buddha’s father, King Śuddhodana, donated this park on the outskirts of the Śākya kingdom of Kapilavastu, in present day Nepal, to the Buddhist community.|The Buddha’s father, King Śuddhodana, donated this park on the outskirts of the Śākya kingdom of Kapilavastu, in present day Nepal, to the Buddhist community. 
སྐྱེས-བུ	A synonym for the wood splint used as a sundial to mark time in ordination ceremonies.
མི-གཡོ-བར-ཉེ-བར-འགྲོ-བ	 Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in the form and formless realms.\nthat leads to immovable states\nthat lead to immovable states| Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in the form and formless realms.\nthat leads to immovable states\nthat lead to immovable states |Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in the form and formless realms.\nthat leads to immovable states\nthat lead to immovable states 
མགུ-བར-བྱ-བ	 A period of penance and chastening service imposed by the saṅgha if a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha and fails to confess it that same day.|A period of penance and chastening service imposed by the saṅgha if a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha and fails to confess it that same day. 
མགུ	 A period of penance and chastening service imposed by the saṅgha if a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha and fails to confess it that same day.|A period of penance and chastening service imposed by the saṅgha if a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha and fails to confess it that same day. 
ཉེ-བར-སྒྲུབ-པ	 The rite by which one is inducted into the novitiate and confirms a candidate’s status as a novice in the Buddhist order of renunciates.|The rite by which one is inducted into the novitiate and confirms a candidate’s status as a novice in the Buddhist order of renunciates. 
བར-ཆད-ཀྱི-ཆོས	 Personal qualities or circumstances that impede the start of or success in a person’s monastic career.|Personal qualities or circumstances that impede the start of or success in a person’s monastic career. 
ཉེ-བར-འཁོར	 A great upholder of monastic discipline, who recited the vinaya at the First Council following the Buddha’s passing. | Disciple; originally the barber of the Śākya princes, ordained together with them, and noted as an expert on the Vinaya.\n(See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-942). | The Buddha’s pupil who was pre-eminent in knowing the monastic rules and recited them and their origins at the first council. He had been a low caste barber in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town.| The Buddha’s pupil who was pre-eminent in knowing the monastic rules and recited them and their origins at the first council. He had been a low caste barber in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town. |A great upholder of monastic discipline, who recited the vinaya at the First Council following the Buddha’s passing. 
བདེ-བར-གཤེགས-པ	 An epithet of the Buddha meaning “well-gone one,” “gone to bliss,” “easily understood.” | An epithet of the buddhas meaning “one who has gone to bliss.”\nHere used also as an epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nSu­gata| An epithet of the buddhas meaning “one who has gone to bliss.”\nHere used also as an epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nSu­gata | An epithet of the buddhas, meaning “the blissfully gone one” or “the well gone one.” | An epithet of the buddhas. | Lit. “who goes to bliss,” a contraction of the Sanskrit sukham gatah). A name of the Buddha. | Sometimes misinterpreted as “one gone to bliss”; the su or {bde bar} is adverbial, and gata denotes a state of being rather than literal motion. Therefore it means “one who has fared well.” | Synonym for a buddha. |Synonym for a buddha. 
རྟོག-གེ-འབར-བ	 The “Blaze of Reason,” an important treatise of Bhāvaviveka’s, in which he critically discusses all the major philosophical views of his day.| The “Blaze of Reason,” an important treatise of Bhāvaviveka’s, in which he critically discusses all the major philosophical views of his day. |The “Blaze of Reason,” an important treatise of Bhāvaviveka’s, in which he critically discusses all the major philosophical views of his day. 
དཀར-བར-གནས	 Ancient Indian sage, known primarily for tales of his short temper and the curses he inflicted, hence the meaning of his name: “difficult to live with.”| Ancient Indian sage, known primarily for tales of his short temper and the curses he inflicted, hence the meaning of his name: “difficult to live with.” |Ancient Indian sage, known primarily for tales of his short temper and the curses he inflicted, hence the meaning of his name: “difficult to live with.” 
ཞི-བ-དཔའ	 In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba dpa'} and the second time as {zhi bar dpa'}.| In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba dpa'} and the second time as {zhi bar dpa'}. |In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba dpa'} and the second time as {zhi bar dpa'}. 
ཞི-བར-དཔའ	 In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba dpa'} and the second time as {zhi bar dpa'}.| In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba dpa'} and the second time as {zhi bar dpa'}. |In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba dpa'} and the second time as {zhi bar dpa'}. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-དུལ-བའི-སེམས	 In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {shin tu dul ba'i sems}, and the second time as {dul bar sems}.| In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {shin tu dul ba'i sems}, and the second time as {dul bar sems}. |In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {shin tu dul ba'i sems}, and the second time as {dul bar sems}. 
དུལ-བར-སེམས	 In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {shin tu dul ba'i sems}, and the second time as {dul bar sems}.| In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {shin tu dul ba'i sems}, and the second time as {dul bar sems}. |In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {shin tu dul ba'i sems}, and the second time as {dul bar sems}. 
ཉེ-འཁོར	 The Buddha’s pupil who was pre-eminent in knowing the monastic rules and recited them and their origins at the first council. He had been a low caste barber in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town.| The Buddha’s pupil who was pre-eminent in knowing the monastic rules and recited them and their origins at the first council. He had been a low caste barber in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town. |The Buddha’s pupil who was pre-eminent in knowing the monastic rules and recited them and their origins at the first council. He had been a low caste barber in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྦྱང-དཀའ	 The fifth bodhisattva bhūmi.| The fifth bodhisattva bhūmi. |The fifth bodhisattva bhūmi. 
རྒྱལ-བར-དཀའ-བ	 The fifth bodhisattva bhūmi.| The fifth bodhisattva bhūmi. |The fifth bodhisattva bhūmi. 
བར-ཤ-ཀ	 Gardenia gummifera. A white fragrant flower that blooms in the rainy season.|Gardenia gummifera. A white fragrant flower that blooms in the rainy season. 
པར-ཤ-ཀ	 Gardenia gummifera. A white fragrant flower that blooms in the rainy season.|Gardenia gummifera. A white fragrant flower that blooms in the rainy season. 
བར-ཆད-བྱེད-པ	 In the time of the Kāraṇḍavyūha this was a group of four demons that created obstacles. This later became the name for the deity Ganesh (as a remover of obstacles), but that is not what is intended here.| In the time of the Kāraṇḍavyūha this was a group of four demons that created obstacles. This later became the name for the deity Ganesh (as a remover of obstacles), but that is not what is intended here. |In the time of the Kāraṇḍavyūha this was a group of four demons that created obstacles. This later became the name for the deity Ganesh (as a remover of obstacles), but that is not what is intended here. 
སྒྲོན-མ-འབར-བ	 Name of the eighty-ninth meditative stability.| Name of the eighty-ninth meditative stability. |Name of the eighty-ninth meditative stability. 
ལྟ-བར-གྱུར-པ	 Also translated here as “false view.” | Also translated here as “opinion.”| Also translated here as “opinion.” |Also translated here as “false view.” 
དཔའ-བར-འགྲོ-བ	 Name of the first meditative stability.|Name of the first meditative stability. 
འབྱུང-བར-འགྱུར	 Also translated here as “emerge.”| Also translated here as “emerge.” | Also translated here as “occur.” |Also translated here as “occur.” 
ལྟ-བར-འོས-པ-དག	 Twentieth of the eighty minor marks.|Twentieth of the eighty minor marks. 
འཚོ-བའི-བར-དུ-བཅང-བ	 There are no limits to the length of time monks are permitted to keep medicine proper. Hence those compounds commonly understood to be medicine proper are literally called “kept lifelong,” that is “lifelong medicines.” These are aimed at combating illnesses that arise from the confluence of factors such as bile, phlegm, and wind. The texts describe these medicines as being made from roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and other plant materials.|There are no limits to the length of time monks are permitted to keep medicine proper. Hence those compounds commonly understood to be medicine proper are literally called “kept lifelong,” that is “lifelong medicines.” These are aimed at combating illnesses that arise from the confluence of factors such as bile, phlegm, and wind. The texts describe these medicines as being made from roots, stems, leaves, flowers, fruits and other plant materials. 
གཞི-ནས-མགུ-བར-བྱ-བ	 Imposed on a monk who incurs a second similar transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his probation.| Imposed on a monk who incurs a second similar transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his probation. |Imposed on a monk who incurs a second similar transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his probation. 
སོ-སོར-ཀུན-དགའ-བར-བྱ	 To welcome a visitor with pleasantries.|To welcome a visitor with pleasantries. 
འདའ-བར-དཀའ-བའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of a tathāgata.|Realm of a tathāgata. 
དཔའ-བར-འགྲོ-བའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 A special type of samādhi (meditative absorption).\nbrave equipoise| A special type of samādhi (meditative absorption).\nbrave equipoise |A special type of samādhi (meditative absorption).\nbrave equipoise 
བསོད-ནམས-སུ-ཉེ-བར-འགྲོ-བ	 Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in pleasant states within the desire realm.\nthat leads to meritorious states\nthat lead to meritorious states|Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in pleasant states within the desire realm.\nthat leads to meritorious states\nthat lead to meritorious states 
ཉེ-བར-ལེན-པའི-ཕུང-པོ-ལྔ	 A collective name for the five impure psycho-physical aggregates: (1) physical forms, (2) feelings, (3) perceptions, (4) formative predispositions, and (5) consciousness.\nThese “acquisitive” psycho-physical aggregates (upadānaskandha, {nye bar len pa'i phung po}) denote the contaminated aggregates (sāsravaskandha, {zag bcas kyi phung po}) which emerge through the primary cause of past actions and afflicted mental states, and become the primary cause for subsequent actions and afflictions.|A collective name for the five impure psycho-physical aggregates: (1) physical forms, (2) feelings, (3) perceptions, (4) formative predispositions, and (5) consciousness.\nThese “acquisitive” psycho-physical aggregates (upadānaskandha, {nye bar len pa'i phung po}) denote the contaminated aggregates (sāsravaskandha, {zag bcas kyi phung po}) which emerge through the primary cause of past actions and afflicted mental states, and become the primary cause for subsequent actions and afflictions. 
སྡུག-བསྔལ-ལ-བདེ-བར-འཛིན-པ	 Third of the four misconceptions.| Third of the four misconceptions. |Third of the four misconceptions. 
ཙནྡན-ཨ-བར-ཏ-ཀ	 Skt. candana is sandalwood, while āvartana means “turning around repeatedly” as in a churning or grinding motion (Monier-Williams).| Skt. candana is sandalwood, while āvartana means “turning around repeatedly” as in a churning or grinding motion (Monier-Williams). |Skt. candana is sandalwood, while āvartana means “turning around repeatedly” as in a churning or grinding motion (Monier-Williams). 
རྟེན-ཅིང-འབྲེལ-བར-འབྱུང-བ-ཡན-ལག-བཅུ-གཉིས	 The twelve causal links that perpetuate life in cyclic existence; starting with ignorance and ending with death.| The twelve causal links that perpetuate life in cyclic existence; starting with ignorance and ending with death. |The twelve causal links that perpetuate life in cyclic existence; starting with ignorance and ending with death. 
ཡང-གཞི-ནས-བསླང-སྟེ-མགུ-བར-བྱ-བ	 Imposed on a monk who incurs a third transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his probation.| Imposed on a monk who incurs a third transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his probation. |Imposed on a monk who incurs a third transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his probation. 
ལྟ-བར-གྱུར-པ-དྲུག-ཅུ-རྩ-གཉིས	 These are enumerated in the Brahmājāla­sūtra and in the Dighanikāya and consist of all views other than the “right view” of the absence of self. All sixty-two fall into either one of the two categories known as the “two extremisms:” “eternalism” (sāśvatavāda) and “nihilism” (ucchedavāda).|These are enumerated in the Brahmājāla­sūtra and in the Dighanikāya and consist of all views other than the “right view” of the absence of self. All sixty-two fall into either one of the two categories known as the “two extremisms:” “eternalism” (sāśvatavāda) and “nihilism” (ucchedavāda). 
ཡང-དག-པའི-དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བར-བཞག-པ-བཞི	 Mindfulness of the body; feelings; the mind; and dharmas.| Mindfulness of the body; feelings; the mind; and dharmas. |Mindfulness of the body; feelings; the mind; and dharmas. 
བསོད-ནམས-མ-ཡིན-པར-ཉེ-བར-འགྲོ-བ	 Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in the three lower realms of animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings.\nthat leads to unmeritorious states\nthat lead to unmeritorious states|Of formations and modes of consciousness that lead to rebirth in the three lower realms of animals, hungry ghosts, and hell beings.\nthat leads to unmeritorious states\nthat lead to unmeritorious states 
ངས-བར-དུ-གཅོད-པའི-ཆོས-གང-དག-བཤད-པ	 Third of the Buddha’s four assurances.| Third of the Buddha’s four assurances. |Third of the Buddha’s four assurances. 
ངེས-པའི-ཚིག-ལ-གདོན-མི-ཟ-བར-འཇུག-པ	 Name of the sixteenth meditative stability.| Name of the sixteenth meditative stability. |Name of the sixteenth meditative stability. 
ཉེ-བར-ཞི-བ-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Seventh of the ten recollections.| Seventh of the ten recollections. |Seventh of the ten recollections. 
སྟོང-གཉིས-པ-བར-མའི-འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས	 A series parallel worlds comprising one thousand chiliocosms, according to traditional Indian cosmology.|A series parallel worlds comprising one thousand chiliocosms, according to traditional Indian cosmology. 
ཕྱག-གི-རི-མོ-བར-མ-ཆད-པ	 Thirty-second of the eighty minor marks.|Thirty-second of the eighty minor marks. 
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-ཀྱི-མཚན-དཔལ-གྱིས-འབར-བ	 Seventy-seventh of the eighty minor marks.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-403).|Seventy-seventh of the eighty minor marks.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-403). 
མི-གཙང-པ-ལ-གཙང-བར-འཛིན-པ	 First of the four misconceptions.| First of the four misconceptions. |First of the four misconceptions. 
འོད-ཀྱིས-གསལ-བར-མཛད-ཅིང-གཤེགས-པ	 Sixty-fourth of the eighty minor marks.| Sixty-fourth of the eighty minor marks. |Sixty-fourth of the eighty minor marks. 
ཤིང-ཤུན	Cloth made from the bark of the valkala tree was worn by Indian ascetics but forbidden to Buddhist monks and nuns.
རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	 Determination, discernment, diligence, and meditative concentration. | Four qualities of the samādhi that have the activity of eliminating negative factors: aspiration, diligence, contemplation, and analysis. | See “four supports for miraculous ability.”\nsupports for miraculous abilities\nsupport for miraculous abilities\nsupports for miraculous ability| See “four supports for miraculous ability.”\nsupports for miraculous abilities\nsupport for miraculous abilities\nsupports for miraculous ability | The four bases of supernatural powers (ṛddhipāda, {rdzu 'phrul gyi rkang pa bzhi}i) are: 1) concentration through will (chanda, {'dun pa}); 2) concentration through vigor (vīrya, {brtson 'grus}); 3) concentration through the mind (citta, {bsam pa}); 4) concentration through investigation (mīmāṃsā, {dpyod pa}). See Rahula 2001: 163. |Determination, discernment, diligence, and meditative concentration. 
བསླབ-པའི-གཞི-རྣམས	These basic precepts are five in number for the laity: (1) not killing, (2) not stealing, (3) chastity, (4) not lying, and (5) avoiding intoxicants. For monks, there are three or five more; avoidance of such things as perfumes, makeup, ointments, garlands, high beds, and afternoon meals.
བསླབ-པའི-གཞི-ལྔ	 Abstaining from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying and intoxication.|Abstaining from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying and intoxication. 
ཡི-གེའི-ཕི-མོ	 basic syllables|basic syllables 
ཨ-རྫ-ཀ	Ocimum basilicum. Commonly known in India as tulsi. A sacred plant in the Hindu tradition.
ཨརྫ-ཀ	Ocimum gratissimum.
འདོད-ཆགས-ཀྱི-གཞི-ཅན	 basis of desire| basis of desire |basis of desire 
ཞེ-སྡང-ཀྱི-གཞི-ཅན	 basis of hatred| basis of hatred |basis of hatred 
ལྟ-བའི-རྣམ-པའི-གཞི-ཅན	basis of the variety of false views
རླངས-པ	 One of the Five Excellent Companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. | One of the first five disciples of the Buddha.| One of the first five disciples of the Buddha. | One of the five companions of Śākyamuni in asceticism and later one of his first five pupils, attaining the state of a stream entrant. After the Buddha’s death he is said to have headed the great council of ten thousand that established a canon of the Buddha’s teachings (while Kāśyapa was the head of a smaller council elsewhere who did the same). |One of the Five Excellent Companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. 
ག-ར-ཀ	Dalbergia lanceolaria.
བ-ཊུ-ཀ	 This seems to be either another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, or an epithet referring to him, meaning “youth”.|This seems to be either another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa, or an epithet referring to him, meaning “youth”. 
བཱ-གུ-ཙི	 Psoralea corylifolia , Psoralea plicata, Vernonia anthelmintica.|Psoralea corylifolia , Psoralea plicata, Vernonia anthelmintica. 
ཏ-མ-ལའི-འདབ-མ	Cinnamomum tamala, which is specifically the Indian bay leaf. Called tamalpatra in Marathi, and tejpatta in Hindi. The Sanskrit and Marathi means “dark-tree leaves.” Also called Malabar leaves, after the name of the northern area of present-day Kerala in southwest India.
འོད-བྱེད-པ	 The third bodhisattva level.|The third bodhisattva level. 
ཟླ-བ-བཟང-པོ	 Name of the fourth meditative stability.| Name of the fourth meditative stability. |Name of the fourth meditative stability. 
སྤྱོད-ལམ-ཕུན-སུམ-ཚོགས-པ	Eighteenth of the eighty minor marks.\nbehavior is excellent
སེམས-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 An alternate name for a bodhisattva.| An alternate name for a bodhisattva. |An alternate name for a bodhisattva. 
སེམས-དཔའ-ཆེན-པོ	 An epithet for an accomplished bodhisattva. | Great being. | Literally “great being.” An epithet for a bodhisattva of great accomplishment. | See “bodhisattva” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-915–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-918.\n‘great being | This translation follows the Tib. (lit. “great mind- hero”), whose translation from Skt. derives from the {lo tsA ba}’s analysis of sattva as meaning “hero,” rather than simply “being.”| This translation follows the Tib. (lit. “great mind- hero”), whose translation from Skt. derives from the {lo tsA ba}’s analysis of sattva as meaning “hero,” rather than simply “being.” |See “bodhisattva” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-915–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-918.\n‘great being 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའ-སེམས-དཔའ-ཆེན-པོ	 A bodhisattva is a great being (mahāsattva) who has the intention to achieve complete enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings.| A bodhisattva is a great being (mahāsattva) who has the intention to achieve complete enlightenment for the benefit of all sentient beings. | Bodhisattva; someone who has the intent to achieve full enlightenment for the benefit of sentient beings. | See “bodhisattva” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-915–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-918 |See “bodhisattva” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-915–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-918 
དཔེ-བྱད-བཟང-པོ	 These characteristics of a supreme being are eighty in number and include such details as the redness of the fingernails and the blackness of the hair.\nfeatures of a superior being| These characteristics of a supreme being are eighty in number and include such details as the redness of the fingernails and the blackness of the hair.\nfeatures of a superior being |These characteristics of a supreme being are eighty in number and include such details as the redness of the fingernails and the blackness of the hair.\nfeatures of a superior being 
སྐྱེས-བུ-ཆེན-པོའི-མཚན-ཉི-ཤུ-རྩ-བརྒྱད	 A variation on the more usual set of 32 such marks; this set is mentioned only in this sūtra and in three others: the Gaṇḍa­vyūha (ch. 45 of Toh 44), the Tathā­gatācintya­guhya­nirdeśa (Toh 47), and the longest Sāgara­mati­paripṛcchā (Toh 153). None of these texts give a list.| A variation on the more usual set of 32 such marks; this set is mentioned only in this sūtra and in three others: the Gaṇḍa­vyūha (ch. 45 of Toh 44), the Tathā­gatācintya­guhya­nirdeśa (Toh 47), and the longest Sāgara­mati­paripṛcchā (Toh 153). None of these texts give a list. |A variation on the more usual set of 32 such marks; this set is mentioned only in this sūtra and in three others: the Gaṇḍa­vyūha (ch. 45 of Toh 44), the Tathā­gatācintya­guhya­nirdeśa (Toh 47), and the longest Sāgara­mati­paripṛcchā (Toh 153). None of these texts give a list. 
ཕྱིར-མི-འོང-བ	 One who has achieved the third of the four levels of attainment on the śrāvaka path, and who will not be reborn in saṃsāra any longer. | One who is destined to no longer return to the world; one of the fruits of the Śrāvakayāna. | The third level of noble ones when practicing the path of the hearers (bound to never be reborn). | The third of the four stages that culminate in becoming an arhat. At this stage a being will not be reborn in this world but will be reborn in the Śuddhāvāsa paradise where he will remain until liberation. | no longer being subject to rebirth\nno longer be subject to rebirth| no longer being subject to rebirth\nno longer be subject to rebirth |no longer being subject to rebirth\nno longer be subject to rebirth 
ལན-གཅིག-ཕྱིར-འོང-བའི-འབྲས-བུ	 Second of the four fruits attainable by śrāvakas.| Second of the four fruits attainable by śrāvakas. |Second of the four fruits attainable by śrāvakas. 
མཐའ-ཡས-པའི-ནམ-མཁའ-མཐའ-ཡས	 The first of the four classes of gods of the formless realm. The activity field called “infinite as the sky,” or “boundless space” is one of the 28 classes of gods in the formless realm.|The first of the four classes of gods of the formless realm. The activity field called “infinite as the sky,” or “boundless space” is one of the 28 classes of gods in the formless realm. 
བིལ-བ	Aegle marmelos.
འཇིག-ཚོགས-ལ-ལྟ-བ	 First of the three fetters; also third of the five fetters associated with the lower realms, which concerns the superimposition of the notion of self upon the five psycho-physical aggregates.\nfalse view about perishable composites | The Tibetan is literally “the view of the destructible accumulation,” and the Sanskrit is “the view of the existing body.” They mean the view that identifies the existence of a self in relation to the skandhas.\nbelieve in the existence of a self | The construction of personal identity in relation to the five aggregates.| The construction of personal identity in relation to the five aggregates. | This consists of twenty varieties of false notion, consisting basically of regarding the temporally impermanent and ultimately insubstantial as “I” or “mine.” The five compulsive aggregates are paired with the self, giving the twenty false notions. For example, the first four false notions are that (1) matter is the self, which is like its owner (rūpaṃ ātmā svāmivat); (2) the self possesses matter, like its ornament (rūpavañ ātmā alaņkāravat); (3) matter belongs to the self, like a slave (ātmīyaṃ rūpaṃ bhṛtyavat); and (4) the self dwells in matter as in a vessel (rūpe ātmā bhajanavat). The other four compulsive aggregates are paired with the self in the same four ways, giving sixteen more false notions concerning sensation, intellect, motivation, and consciousness, hypostatizing an impossible relationship with a nonexistent, permanent, substantial self. |The Tibetan is literally “the view of the destructible accumulation,” and the Sanskrit is “the view of the existing body.” They mean the view that identifies the existence of a self in relation to the skandhas.\nbelieve in the existence of a self 
བ-རུ-ར	 Terminalia bellirica.|Terminalia bellirica. 
གསལ-ལྡན	 Modern Vārāṇasi.|Modern Vārāṇasi. 
དུས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	Also called gum benzoin and gum benjamin. Not to be confused with the unrelated chemical called benzoin. It is the resin of styrax trees.
བཻ-དཱུ-རྱ	 Precious/semiprecious stone; sometimes translated as lapis lazuli.|Although this has often been translated as lapis lazuli, the descriptions and references in the literature, both Sanskrit and Tibetan, match beryl. The Pāli form is veḷuriya. The Prākrit form verulia is the source for the English beryl . This normally refers to the blue or aquamarine beryl, but there are also white, yellow, and green beryls, though green beryl is called “emerald.” 
གོ-ལ	Piper betle.
འཁྲུལ-པ	Bewilderment is the confusion arising from the subject-object dichotomy and fundamental ignorance, on the basis of which rebirth in cyclic existence is perpetuated.
བཟང-པོ	 One of the five companions of Śākyamuni in asceticism, who abandoned him when he renounced asceticism. Later they became the Buddha’s first five pupils, with Bhadrika the second of them to become his follower.| One of the five companions of Śākyamuni in asceticism, who abandoned him when he renounced asceticism. Later they became the Buddha’s first five pupils, with Bhadrika the second of them to become his follower. | The world realm where Yaśodharā will become a buddha. |The world realm where Yaśodharā will become a buddha. 
བཟང-སྐྱོང	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.” A bodhisattva who appears prominently in certain sūtras, such as The Samādhi of the Presence of the Buddhas, and perhaps also the merchant of that name who is the principal interlocutor in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-044-003.html (tshong dpon bzang skyong gyis zhus pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo, toh 83).|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” A bodhisattva who appears prominently in certain sūtras, such as The Samādhi of the Presence of the Buddhas, and perhaps also the merchant of that name who is the principal interlocutor in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-044-003.html (tshong dpon bzang skyong gyis zhus pa zhes bya ba theg pa chen po’i mdo, toh 83). 
བཟང-སྐྱོན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
བཟང-ལྡན	 One of the first five disciples of the Buddha.| One of the first five disciples of the Buddha. | One of the five excellent companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. |One of the five excellent companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. 
བཟང-ལྡན-རྒྱལ-པོ	 Supreme among the upper-class monks. He became an arhat in the first rainy season. One of the first group of Śākya princes to become a monk. He is said to have been a king in many successive previous lifetimes, which is why the title of “king” is added after his name in the sūtra. He is not to be confused with the Bhadrika who was one of the Buddha’s first five pupils.| Supreme among the upper-class monks. He became an arhat in the first rainy season. One of the first group of Śākya princes to become a monk. He is said to have been a king in many successive previous lifetimes, which is why the title of “king” is added after his name in the sūtra. He is not to be confused with the Bhadrika who was one of the Buddha’s first five pupils. |Supreme among the upper-class monks. He became an arhat in the first rainy season. One of the first group of Śākya princes to become a monk. He is said to have been a king in many successive previous lifetimes, which is why the title of “king” is added after his name in the sūtra. He is not to be confused with the Bhadrika who was one of the Buddha’s first five pupils. 
བཅོམ-ལྡན-འདས	 A general term of respect given to persons of spiritual attainment. Translations into English have been “Holy One,” “Blessed One,” and “World-Honored One.” It is here given in the Sanskrit nominative case, bhagavān. | Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nAccording to Tibetan hermeneutics, the term defines a teacher or buddha who primordially subdues ({bcom}) the four demonic forces, possesses ({ldan}) the six attributes of greatness ({che ba'i yon tan drug}, viz: lordship, noble form, glory, fame, pristine cognition, and perseverance), and transcends ({'das}) all sorrow, without abiding in the extremes of existence and quiescence.\nAlso translated here as “Blessed One.” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121).| Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nAccording to Tibetan hermeneutics, the term defines a teacher or buddha who primordially subdues ({bcom}) the four demonic forces, possesses ({ldan}) the six attributes of greatness ({che ba'i yon tan drug}, viz: lordship, noble form, glory, fame, pristine cognition, and perseverance), and transcends ({'das}) all sorrow, without abiding in the extremes of existence and quiescence.\nAlso translated here as “Blessed One.” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121). | Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nAccording to Tibetan hermeneutics, the term defines a teacher or buddha who primordially subdues ({bcom}) the four demonic forces, possesses ({ldan}) the six attributes of greatness ({che ba'i yon tan drug}, viz: lordship, noble form, glory, fame, pristine cognition, and perseverance), and transcends ({'das}) all sorrow, without abiding in the extremes of existence and quiescence.\nAlso translated here as “Lord” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121). | Epithet of the Buddha, meaning “one who has fortune” (explained as having six features); or “one who has vanquished (Māra).” | Epithet of the Buddha. | Honorific address for a buddha. | Sometimes also translated “Lord.” | “Illustrious One,” an epithet of the Buddha. | “Lord” is chosen to translate the title Bhagavān because it is the term of greatest respect current in our “sacred” language, as established for the Deity in the Elizabethan version of the Bible. Indeed, the Skt. Bhagavān was given as a title to the Buddha, although it also served the non-Buddhist Indians of the day and, subsequently, it served as an honorific title of their particular deities. As the Buddha is clearly described in the sūtras as the “Supreme Teacher of Gods and Men,” there seems little danger that he may be confused with any particular deity through the use of this term [as indeed in Buddhist sūtras various deities, creators, protectors, etc., are shown in their respective roles]. Thus I feel it would compromise the weight and function of the original Bhagavān to use any less weighty term than “Lord” for the Buddha. | “One who has bhaga,” which has many diverse meanings including “good fortune,” “happiness,” and “majesty.” In the Buddhist context, it means one who has the good fortune of attaining enlightenment. The Tibetan translation has three syllables defined to mean “one who has conquered (the maras), possesses (the qualities of enlightenment), and has transcended (saṃsāra, or both saṃsāra and nirvāṇa). | “One who has bhaga,” which has many diverse meanings, including good fortune, happiness, and majesty. In the Buddhist context, it means one who has the good fortune of attaining enlightenment. |Sometimes also translated “Lord.” 
བཅོམ-ལྡན-འདས-མ	 Also rendered as “Bhagavatī.”| Also rendered as “Blessed Lady.” |Also rendered as “Bhagavatī.” 
ཆུ-ཀླུང-སྐལ-ལྡན-ཤིང-རྟ	 Another name for the river Gaṇgā, mentioned by the teacher Sañjayin in encouraging Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana to seek out the Buddha who was born on its banks.|Another name for the river Gaṇgā, mentioned by the teacher Sañjayin in encouraging Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana to seek out the Buddha who was born on its banks. 
སྨན-གྱི-བླ-བཻ-དུ-རྱའི-འོད	Teacher of Medicine, King of Vaiḍūrya Light.
སྨན-གྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. | Lit. “King of Healers.” In the story of Śākyamuni’s former life in this sūtra, he is the Tathāgata of the universe Mahāvyūha, during the eon called Vicaraṇa, who taught Prince Candracchattra about Dharma-worship. In later Buddhism, this Buddha is believed to be the supernatural patron of healing and medicine. | Literally, “King of Medicine.” Name of a bodhisattva.| Literally, “King of Medicine.” Name of a bodhisattva. | Name of a bodhisattva, “King of Medicine.” |Lit. “King of Healers.” In the story of Śākyamuni’s former life in this sūtra, he is the Tathāgata of the universe Mahāvyūha, during the eon called Vicaraṇa, who taught Prince Candracchattra about Dharma-worship. In later Buddhism, this Buddha is believed to be the supernatural patron of healing and medicine. 
སྨན-གྱི-བླ-བཻ-དུ-རྱའི-འོད-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 The buddha of medicine.|The buddha of medicine. 
སྨན-ཡང-དག-འཕགས-ལ-སོགས-པ	 Name of a bodhisattva, “Medicine-Risen Up.”|Name of a bodhisattva, “Medicine-Risen Up.” 
སྨན-ཡང-དག-འཕགས	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
བྷ-ར-དྭ-ཛ	 One of the principal śrāvaka pupils of Śākyamuni. It is said that his previous lives had been in hells and then as a human he had only stones to eat because of his mistreatment of his mother in one lifetime. | The name of a long enduring family in the distant past in which twenty thousand buddhas appeared.| The name of a long enduring family in the distant past in which twenty thousand buddhas appeared. |One of the principal śrāvaka pupils of Śākyamuni. It is said that his previous lives had been in hells and then as a human he had only stones to eat because of his mistreatment of his mother in one lifetime. 
བྷ-ར-དྷབ༹-ཛ	 Śrāvaka arhat; one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”).|Śrāvaka arhat; one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”). 
ལེགས-ལྡན-འབྱེད	 (c. a.d. 400). A major Indian philosopher, a master of the Mādhyamika school of Buddhism, who founded a sub-school known as Svātantrika.|(c. a.d. 400). A major Indian philosopher, a master of the Mādhyamika school of Buddhism, who founded a sub-school known as Svātantrika. 
རྔ-ཆེན	A conical or bowl-shaped kettledrum, with an upper surface that is beaten with sticks.
རྔ-བོ-ཆེ	 A conical or bowl-shaped kettledrum, with an upper surface that is beaten with sticks.|A conical or bowl-shaped kettledrum, with an upper surface that is beaten with sticks. 
དགེ-སློང	 A fully ordained male practitioner observing 253 Vinaya vows.| A fully ordained male practitioner observing 253 Vinaya vows. | A fully ordained monk of the Buddhist Sangha. | A fully ordained monk of the Buddhist Saṅgha. | A fully ordained monk of the Buddhist saṅgha. | A fully ordained monk. | Fully ordained Buddhist monk. | Fully ordained buddhist monk. | Lit. “beggar.” Buddhist mendicant monk; bhikṣuṇī is the female counterpart. | This term refers specifically to a monk who has received full ordination, the highest level of ordination available in the Buddhist tradition. |Fully ordained Buddhist monk. 
དགེ-སློང-མ	 A fully ordained female practitioner observing 364 Vinaya vows.| A fully ordained female practitioner observing 364 Vinaya vows. | A fully ordained nun of the Buddhist Saṅgha. | Fully ordained Buddhist nun. | Fully ordained buddhist nun. |Fully ordained Buddhist nun. 
འཇིགས-བསྒྲགས-དབྱངས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 The names of millions of buddhas within one eon in the distant past, and also the name of a particular buddha in chapter 19.|The names of millions of buddhas within one eon in the distant past, and also the name of a particular buddha in chapter 19. 
འཇིགས-པའི-བླ-མ	 The name of both a previous life of Buddha Śākyamuni as a king (translated as {'jigs pa'i bla ma}) and the name of one of the buddhas (translated as {'jigs mchog}) that Śākyamuni received the samādhi teaching from in a previous life.|The name of both a previous life of Buddha Śākyamuni as a king (translated as {'jigs pa'i bla ma}) and the name of one of the buddhas (translated as {'jigs mchog}) that Śākyamuni received the samādhi teaching from in a previous life. 
འཇིགས-མཆོག	 The name of both a previous life of Buddha Śākyamuni as a king (translated as {'jigs pa'i bla ma}) and the name of one of the buddhas (translated as {'jigs mchog}) that Śākyamuni received the samādhi teaching from in a previous life.|The name of both a previous life of Buddha Śākyamuni as a king (translated as {'jigs pa'i bla ma}) and the name of one of the buddhas (translated as {'jigs mchog}) that Śākyamuni received the samādhi teaching from in a previous life. 
ངན-སྤོང	 One of the seven great rishis of ancient India. The founder of Indian astrology.|One of the seven great rishis of ancient India. The founder of Indian astrology. 
ཁྲོ-གཉེར-ཅན	 Along with Tārā, a female deity visualized in the sādhana of Lavaṇāmbha.|Along with Tārā, a female deity visualized in the sādhana of Lavaṇāmbha. 
ས	 A level of enlightenment, usually referring to the ten levels of the enlightened bodhisattvas. | Level of the realization of a bodhisattva. Typically there are ten bhūmis, sometimes thirteen. | Level of the realization of a bodhisattva; according to the general Mahāyāna, there are ten bodhisattva levels; according to Vajrayāna, thirteen. | Literally “grounds” in which qualities grow, and also it means “levels.” Bhūmi refers specifically to levels of enlightenment, especially the ten levels of the enlightened bodhisattvas.\nlevel | The path of a bodhisattva is divided into ten stages of spiritual attainment called grounds. The eleventh ground corresponds to complete enlightenment.| The path of a bodhisattva is divided into ten stages of spiritual attainment called grounds. The eleventh ground corresponds to complete enlightenment. |Level of the realization of a bodhisattva. Typically there are ten bhūmis, sometimes thirteen. 
བྷུ-མི-བི-དཱ-རཱི	 Same as bhūmisphoṭa (?); Agaricus campestris (?)|Same as bhūmisphoṭa (?); Agaricus campestris (?) 
འབྱུང-པོ	 A class of spirit. | A class of spirits. | A general term for spirit, ghost, or demon (either positive or negative).| A general term for spirit, ghost, or demon (either positive or negative). | A generic term for spirits or ghosts. | A ghost in the Indian tradition, sometimes haunting houses where they were killed. They can appear in human or animal form. They cast no shadow and their feet are always backward. In Hindi they are called bhoot. | This can be a general name for spirits or demons, but is also used specifically for ghosts. |A class of spirit. 
བྱུང-པོ	 A class of beings who are connected with the elements (water, fire, air, earth), like the river spirits, tree spirits, and so on.|A class of beings who are connected with the elements (water, fire, air, earth), like the river spirits, tree spirits, and so on. 
འབྱུང-མོ	 A female bhūta.|A female bhūta. 
སྐྱ-སྣར	 Bignonia suaveolens. The Indian species of bignonia. They have trumpet-shaped flowers and the small trees are common throughout India.|Bignonia suaveolens. The Indian species of bigonia. They have trumpet-shaped flowers and the small trees are common throughout India. 
པ-ཏ-ལ	Bignonia suaveolens. The Indian species of bigonia. They have trumpet-shaped flowers and the small trees are common throughout India.
བི-ཙི-ཀུཎྜ-ལི	 A yakṣa.|A yakṣa. 
མཁྲིས-པ-ལས-གྱུར-པའི-ནད	Second of the four kinds of disease.
སྟོང-གསུམ-གྱི-སྟོང-ཆེན-པོའི-འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས	 A series of parallel worlds comprising one thousand dichiliocosms, according to traditional Indian cosmology.| A series of parallel worlds comprising one thousand dichiliocosms, according to traditional Indian cosmology. | A universe containing one billion worlds. | The world system of a thousand million (10 to the power of 3) worlds. |Lit. “three-thousand-great-thousand-world realm.” Each of these is composed of one thousand realms, each of which contains one thousand realms, each of which contains one thousand realms = one thousand to the third power = one billion worlds. 
བིམ-པ	 Momordica monadelpha. A perennial climbing plant, the fruit of which is a bright red gourd. Because of its color it is frequently used in poetry as a simile for lips.| Momordica monadelpha. A perennial climbing plant, the fruit of which is a bright red gourd. Because of its color it is frequently used in poetry as a simile for lips. | Peach |Peach 
གཟུགས-ཅན	 The queen, wife of King Mahāpadma and mother of Bimbisāra.| The queen, wife of King Mahāpadma and mother of Bimbisāra. |The queen, wife of King Mahāpadma and mother of Bimbisāra. 
བཙུན-མོ-གཟུགས-ཅན	 The queen, wife of King Mahāpadma and mother of Bimbisāra.| The queen, wife of King Mahāpadma and mother of Bimbisāra. |The queen, wife of King Mahāpadma and mother of Bimbisāra. 
གཟུགས-ཅན-སྙིང-པོ	 The king of Magadha and a great patron of Śākyamūni Buddha. His birth coincided with the Buddha’s. His father, mistakenly attributing the brilliant light that marked the Buddha’s birth to the birth of his son by Queen Bimbī (Goldie), named him ‘Essence of Gold.’|The king of Magadha and a great patron of Śākyamūni Buddha. His birth coincided with the Buddha’s. His father, mistakenly attributing the brilliant light that marked the Buddha’s birth to the birth of his son by Queen Bimbī (Goldie), named him ‘Essence of Gold.’ 
སྒོང-སྐྱེས	 Second of the four modes of birth.|Second of the four modes of birth. 
མངལ-སྐྱེས	 First of the four modes of birth.|First of the four modes of birth. 
རྫུས-སྐྱེས	 Fourth of the four modes of birth.|Fourth of the four modes of birth. 
ལྷན-ཅིག-སྐྱེས-པའི-ལྷ	 Yakṣa and other spirits that appear at the same time a person is born in order to protect them.|Yakṣa and other spirits that appear at the same time a person is born in order to protect them. 
སྐྱེ-གནས-བཞི	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2088.|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2088. 
དྲོད-གཤེར-ལས-སྐྱེས	 Third of the four modes of birth.|Third of the four modes of birth. 
སྔོན-གྱི-གནས-རྣམ-པ-དུ-མ-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ-དང-སེམས-ཅན-རྣམས-ཀྱི-འཆི-འཕོ-དང-སྐྱེ-བ-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Ninth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively perceive and definitively know [all the circumstances of] sentient beings, from their death and rebirth to how they proceed to blissful realms, how they proceed to inferior realms, and how they proceed in accordance with their past actions| Ninth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively perceive and definitively know [all the circumstances of] sentient beings, from their death and rebirth to how they proceed to blissful realms, how they proceed to inferior realms, and how they proceed in accordance with their past actions |Ninth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively perceive and definitively know [all the circumstances of] sentient beings, from their death and rebirth to how they proceed to blissful realms, how they proceed to inferior realms, and how they proceed in accordance with their past actions 
མི-སྐྱེ-བ	This refers to the ultimate nature of reality, to the fact that, ultimately, nothing has ever been produced or born nor will it ever be because birth and production can occur only on the relative, or superficial, level. Hence “birthlessness” is a synonym of “voidness,” “reality,” “absolute,” “ultimate,” “infinity,” etc.
ལྷུང-བཟེད-ནག-པ-ཅན	A euphemism for those who seek alms, understood to refer to Buddhist monks.
ས-ནག-པོ	A type of soil (?)
ཀ-མ-ཅི	 Solanum nigrum.|Solanum nigrum. 
ཀ-མ-རྩ	 Solanum nigrum.|Solanum nigrum. 
མུཎྜ-རི	 Solanum nigrum.|Solanum nigrum. 
ཕོ-བ-རིས	Piper nigrum.
བྱི-ཏང-ཀ	 Embelia ribes, or Embelia tsjeriam-cottam.|Embelia ribes, or Embelia tsjeriam-cottam. 
བི-ཌཾ-ག	 Embelia ribes, or Embelia tsjeriam-cottam.|Embelia ribes, or Embelia tsjeriam-cottam. 
ཛམ-བུ	 Syzygium cumini.|Syzygium cumini. 
བདེ-བ	 Also translated here as “bliss.”|Also translated here as “happiness.” 
ཁྲག-ནད	Illnesses that may be considered an impediment to ordination\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
རྩ-རྣམས-མི-མངོན-པ	Twelfth of the eighty minor marks.
དགེ-བའི-མེ-ཏོག-རྒྱས-ཤིང-དག-པ	 Name of the seventy-fourth meditative stability. “Purity” here could also be rendered “vibrance.”|Name of the seventy-fourth meditative stability. “Purity” here could also be rendered “vibrance.” 
ཨུཏྤལ	 Nymphaea caerulea (?)| Nymphaea caerulea (?) |Nymphaea caerulea (?) 
ཨུད-པལ	 Nymphaea caerulea. The “blue lotus” is actually a lily, so it is also known as the blue water lily.|Nymphaea caerulea. The “blue lotus” is actually a lily, so it is also known as the blue water lily. 
བྱང-ཆུབ	 The Sanskrit can mean knowledge, realization, waking, blossoming, etc., according to context. The Tibetan translates as “purified and accomplished.”| The Sanskrit can mean knowledge, realization, waking, blossoming, etc., according to context. The Tibetan translates as “purified and accomplished.” | This word requires too much explanation for this glossary because, indeed, the whole sūtra—and the whole of Buddhist literature—is explanatory of only this. Here we simply mention the translation equivalent. |This word requires too much explanation for this glossary because, indeed, the whole sūtra—and the whole of Buddhist literature—is explanatory of only this. Here we simply mention the translation equivalent. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཤིང	 The tree beneath which every buddha in this world will manifest the attainment of buddhahood. | Tree of Enlightenment at Vajrāsana.| Tree of Enlightenment at Vajrāsana. |The tree beneath which every buddha in this world will manifest the attainment of buddhahood. 
ཨ-ཤྭད-ཐ	 Ficus religiosa, the species of fig tree under which the Buddha attained awakening.| Ficus religiosa, the species of fig tree under which the Buddha attained awakening. |Ficus religiosa, the species of fig tree under which the Buddha attained awakening. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སྙིང-པོ	 "The essence of enlightenment.” The spot in Bodhgaya where the Buddha attained enlightenment. | The exact place where every buddha in this world will manifest the attainment of buddhahood. The spot beneath the Bodhi tree in the village presently known as Bodhgaya. Literally “the essence of enlightenment.” | The place where Śakyamuni Buddha achieved awakening and where countless other Buddhas are said to have achieved awakening. This is understood to be located under the bodhi tree in present-day Bodhgaya, India.| The place where Śakyamuni Buddha achieved awakening and where countless other Buddhas are said to have achieved awakening. This is understood to be located under the bodhi tree in present-day Bodhgaya, India. | Under the Tree of Enlightenment at Vajrāsana; also used metaphorically. |The place where Śakyamuni Buddha achieved awakening and where countless other Buddhas are said to have achieved awakening. This is understood to be located under the bodhi tree in present-day Bodhgaya, India. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སྙིང-པོ	 Haribhadra defines it as “a place used as a seat, where the maṇḍa, here ‘essence,’ of enlightenment is present.” See Lamotte, p. 198, n. 105. The main “seat of enlightenment” is the spot under the bo tree at Buddha Gaya, where the Buddha sat and attained unexcelled, perfect enlightenment. It is not to be confused with bodhimaṇḍala, “circle of enlightenment.”| Haribhadra defines it as “a place used as a seat, where the maṇḍa, here ‘essence,’ of enlightenment is present.” See Lamotte, p. 198, n. 105. The main “seat of enlightenment” is the spot under the bo tree at Buddha Gaya, where the Buddha sat and attained unexcelled, perfect enlightenment. It is not to be confused with bodhimaṇḍala, “circle of enlightenment.” | Place at Bodh Gaya where the Buddha attained awakening. | The place where Śakyamuni Buddha achieved awakening and where countless other Buddhas are said to have achieved awakening. This is understood to be located under the bodhi tree in present-day Bodhgaya, India. |The place where Śakyamuni Buddha achieved awakening and where countless other Buddhas are said to have achieved awakening. This is understood to be located under the bodhi tree in present-day Bodhgaya, India. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའ	 A being who is dedicated to the cultivation and fulfilment of the altruistic intention to attain manifestly perfect buddhahood, traversing the five bodhisattva paths and ten bodhisattva levels. Bodhisattvas purposely opt to remain within cyclic existence in order to liberate all sentient beings, instead of simply seeking personal freedom from suffering. Philosophically, they realize the two aspects of selflessness, with respect to afflicted mental states and the nature of all phenomena.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-142.) | A living being who has produced the spirit of enlightenment in himself and whose constant dedication, lifetime after lifetime, is to attain the unexcelled, perfect enlightenment of Buddhahood. | A person who is dedicated not merely to attaining liberation through attaining the state of an arhat, but to becoming a buddha. A name created from the Sanskritization of the middle-Indic bodhisatto, the Sanskrit equivalent of which was bodhisakta, “one who is fixed on enlightenment.” | A person who is dedicated not merely to gaining liberation through attaining the state of an arhat, but to becoming a buddha. A name created from the Sanskritization of the middle-Indic bodhisatto, the Sanskrit equivalent of which was bodhisakta, “one who is fixed on enlightenment.” | According to the Mahāyāna, an individual with the intent to achieve awakening for the sake of all beings.| According to the Mahāyāna, an individual with the intent to achieve awakening for the sake of all beings. | Someone who practices according to the Vehicle of the Bodhisattvas; one who aims for complete buddhahood; “awakening hero;” “one who has a wish for awakening;” “one who awakens sentient beings.” |A living being who has produced the spirit of enlightenment in himself and whose constant dedication, lifetime after lifetime, is to attain the unexcelled, perfect enlightenment of Buddhahood. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའི-སྡེ-སྣོད	 The collection of the Vast (vaipulya) Sūtras of the Mahāyāna, supposed to have been collected supernaturally by a great assembly of bodhisattvas led by Maitreya, Mañjuśrī, and Vajrapāṇi. There is a Mahāyāna sūtra called Bodhisattvapiṭaka, but the word more usually refers to the whole collection (piṭaka) of Mahāyāna sūtras, to distinguish them from the Three Collections (Tripiṭaka) of the Hinayāna. | The sūtras and teachings of the bodhisattva vehicle in general (not to be confused with the sūtra of the same name, Toh 56, in the Ratnakūṭa).| The sūtras and teachings of the bodhisattva vehicle in general (not to be confused with the sūtra of the same name, Toh 56, in the Ratnakūṭa). |The sūtras and teachings of the bodhisattva vehicle in general (not to be confused with the sūtra of the same name, Toh 56, in the Ratnakūṭa). 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའི-ཆོས-མ-འདྲེས-པ-བཅོ-བརྒྱད	 These consist of the bodhisattva’s natural (uninstructed) possession of generosity, morality, tolerance, effort, meditation, and wisdom; of his uniting all beings with the four means of unification, knowing the method of dedication (of virtue to enlightenment), exemplification, through skill in liberative art, of the positive results of the Mahāyāna, as suited to the (various) modes of behavior of all living beings, his not falling from the Mahāyāna, showing the entrances of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, skill in the technique of reconciliation of dichotomies, impeccable progress in all his lives, guided by wisdom without any conditioned activities, possession of ultimate action of body, speech, and mind directed by the tenfold path of good action, nonabandonment of any of the realms of living beings, through his assumption of a body endowed with tolerance of every conceivable suffering, manifestation of that which delights all living beings, inexhaustible preservation of the mind of omniscience, as stable as the virtue-constituted tree of wish-fulfilling gems, (even) in the midst of the infantile (ordinary persons) and (narrow-minded) religious disciples, however trying they might be, and adamant irreversibility from demonstrating the quest of the Dharma of the Buddha, for the sake of the attainment of the miraculous consecration conferring the skill in liberative art that transmutes all things. (Mvy, nos. 787-804)|These consist of the bodhisattva’s natural (uninstructed) possession of generosity, morality, tolerance, effort, meditation, and wisdom; of his uniting all beings with the four means of unification, knowing the method of dedication (of virtue to enlightenment), exemplification, through skill in liberative art, of the positive results of the Mahāyāna, as suited to the (various) modes of behavior of all living beings, his not falling from the Mahāyāna, showing the entrances of saṃsāra and nirvāṇa, skill in the technique of reconciliation of dichotomies, impeccable progress in all his lives, guided by wisdom without any conditioned activities, possession of ultimate action of body, speech, and mind directed by the tenfold path of good action, nonabandonment of any of the realms of living beings, through his assumption of a body endowed with tolerance of every conceivable suffering, manifestation of that which delights all living beings, inexhaustible preservation of the mind of omniscience, as stable as the virtue-constituted tree of wish-fulfilling gems, (even) in the midst of the infantile (ordinary persons) and (narrow-minded) religious disciples, however trying they might be, and adamant irreversibility from demonstrating the quest of the Dharma of the Buddha, for the sake of the attainment of the miraculous consecration conferring the skill in liberative art that transmutes all things. (Mvy, nos. 787-804) 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའི-ཐེག-པ	 The way or vehicle of the bodhisattvas. | This is equivalent to the Great Vehicle.| This is equivalent to the Great Vehicle. |The way or vehicle of the bodhisattvas. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-གི-མེ-ཏོག-བྱེད	 Name of a buddha.|Name of a buddha. 
སྤུ-མཐོན-ཏིང-ཅན	Fifty-first of the eighty minor marks.
སྤུ-གཙང-བ	Fifty-second of the eighty minor marks.
སྐུའི-སྤུ-གྱེན-དུ-ཕྱོགས-པ	Twelfth of the thirty-two major marks.
སྐུ-གཙང-བ	Fourth of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are clean
སྲེད-མེད-ཀྱི-བུའི-ལྟར-སྐུ-གྲིམས-པ	 Second of the eighty minor marks. See “Nārāyaṇa.”\nbodies are firm, like that of Nārāyaṇa| Second of the eighty minor marks. See “Nārāyaṇa.”\nbodies are firm, like that of Nārāyaṇa |Second of the eighty minor marks. See “Nārāyaṇa.”\nbodies are firm, like that of Nārāyaṇa 
སྐུ-ལ-དྲི-མ-མེད-ཅིང-དྲི-མི-ཞིམ-པ-མེད-པ	Thirty-fourth of the eighty minor marks.
སྐུ-སྣུམ-བག-ཅན	Seventh of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are lustrous
སྐུ-མ-བཏུད-པ	Eighth of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are not slouched\nbodies do not slouch
སྐུ-འཇམ-པ	Fifth of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are soft
སྐུ-མཉེན-པ	 Sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are supple| Sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are supple |Sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nbodies are supple 
སྐུ-དབྱིབས-ལེགས-པ	Fourteenth of the eighty minor marks.
སྐུ-ཤིན-ཏུ-ལེགས-པར-འབྲེལ-པ	Fifteenth of the eighty minor marks.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྐུ	 Also translated “ultimate body.” | Dharmakāya or body of dharma refers to the Buddha’s realization of reality. Sometimes translated “truth body” or “reality body.” In other contexts, particularly in early texts, the term may also refer to the Buddha’s qualities as a collective whole, or to his teachings as embodying him. | In distinction to the rūpakāya, or form body of a buddha, this is the eternal imperceptible realization of a buddha. In origin it was a term for the presence of the Dharma, and has come to become synonymous with the true nature. | In distinction to the rūpakāya, or form body of a buddha, this is the eternal, imperceivable realization of a buddha. In origin it was a term for the presence of the Dharma, and has become synonymous with the true nature. | In distinction to the rūpakāya, or “form body” of a buddha, this is the eternal, imperceivable realization of a buddha. In origin it was a term for the presence of the Dharma, and has come to be synonymous with the true nature. | One of the subdivisions in the collection of dharmas that constitutes a buddha, variously explained but usually more closely related to the aspect of ultimate truth. | See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-062-010.html#UT22084-062-010-23.\nDharma body, Truth body | The ultimate nature or essence of the fruitional enlightened mind of the buddhas, which is non-arising, free from the limits of conceptual elaboration, empty of inherent existence, naturally radiant, beyond duality, and spacious.| The ultimate nature or essence of the fruitional enlightened mind of the buddhas, which is non-arising, free from the limits of conceptual elaboration, empty of inherent existence, naturally radiant, beyond duality, and spacious. | The “body of phenomena,” one of the three (sometimes four) bodies of the Buddha. |Also translated “ultimate body.” 
ལུ-ཀྱི-མཐའ-པའི-ཚོར-བ	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-661.|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-661. 
འབྲུ-མར-བསྐོལ-བ	In Āyurvedic medicine, taila can be used both internally and externally. It is produced by boiling herbs in edible oil, such as sesame seed oil.
ལྷ-འབངས	Bondmen bound to serve the saṅgha.
བྲན	Someone born into service, e.g. the children of slaves, serfs, and servants.
རུས-པ-ལ-ཟུག-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཤེད-ལས-སྐྱེས	 Manu being the archetypal human, the progenitor of mankind, in the Mahā­bhārata, the Purāṇas, and other Indian texts, “born of Manu” is a synonym of “human being” or mankind in general. Also rendered “son of Manu.”| Manu being the archetypal human, the progenitor of mankind, in the Mahā­bhārata, the Purāṇas, and other Indian texts, “born of Manu” is a synonym of “human being” or mankind in general. Also rendered “son of Manu.” |Manu being the archetypal human, the progenitor of mankind, in the Mahā­bhārata, the Purāṇas, and other Indian texts, “born of Manu” is a synonym of “human being” or mankind in general. Also rendered “son of Manu.” 
མཚམས	An area demarcated by the saṅgha which then functions as the community’s borders. Such boundaries may be set to define the area monks are confined to during the rains retreat. A gathering of all the monks within these boundaries constitutes a “consensus,” during which formal acts of saṅgha may be performed.
སྤོབས-པ-མཐའ-ཡས	 Name of the seventy-sixth meditative stability.|Name of the seventy-sixth meditative stability. 
སྣང-བ-མཐའ-ཡས-པ	 Name of the thirty-fifth meditative stability.|Name of the thirty-fifth meditative stability. 
ཚངས-པ	 A divine being who rules the Brahma realm. | A high-ranking deity who presides over a divine world where other beings consider him the creator; he is also considered to be the Lord of the Sahā-world (our universe). | An important god in the Vedic pantheon who asked Buddha to teach after his awakening, which led Buddha to seek out his former companions. | Brahmā’s paradise. The lowest of the three paradises that form the paradises of the first dhyāna in the form realm. Also refers to the devas who live there.| Brahmā’s paradise. The lowest of the three paradises that form the paradises of the first dhyāna in the form realm. Also refers to the devas who live there. | Creator-lord of a universe, there being as many as there are universes, whose number is incalculable. Hence, in Buddhist belief, a title of a deity who has attained supremacy in a particular universe, rather than a personal name. For example, the Brahmā of the Aśoka universe is personally called Śikhin, to distinguish him from other Brahmās. A Brahmā resides at the summit of the realm of pure matter (rūpadhātu), and is thus higher in status than a Śakra. | Lord of the Sahā world (q.v.). Buddhists see Brahmā as a god occupying a high position in cyclic existence, with a very long life and a great deal of power. | Name of a god (deva). | One of the three principal Hindu gods. | The devas who live in the paradise of Brahmā. | The personification of the universal force of Brahman, the deity in the form realm, who was during the Buddha’s time considered the supreme deity and creator of the universe. In the cosmogony of many universes, each with a thousand million worlds, there are many Brahmās. | The personification of the universal force of Brahman, the deity in the form realm, who was, during the Buddha’s time, considered in India to be the supreme deity and creator of the universe. | The personification of the universal force of Brahman, who became a higher deity than Indra, the supreme deity of the early Vedas. | Vedic creator god. In Buddhist texts Brahmā refers to various gods in high situations of cyclic existence. |The personification of the universal force of Brahman, who became a higher deity than Indra, the supreme deity of the early Vedas. 
ཙངས-པ	 A high ranking deity, presiding over a divine world where other beings consider him the creator; he is also considered to be the “Lord of the Sahā-world (our universe).”|A high ranking deity, presiding over a divine world where other beings consider him the creator; he is also considered to be the “Lord of the Sahā-world (our universe).” 
ཚངས-རིས	 Brahmā’s paradise. The lowest of the three paradises that form the paradises of the first dhyāna in the form realm. Also refers to the devas who live there. | First god realm of form, meaning “stratum of Brahmā.” | The lowest heaven of the form realm.| The lowest heaven of the form realm. | The lowest of the three paradises that are the paradises of the first dhyāna in the form realm. The class of devas who live in the paradise of Brahmā. |The lowest heaven of the form realm. 
ཚངས-པའི-བསོད-ནམས	 Brahmic merit or pure merit refers to an extraordinary type of merit which leads to rebirth in the realm of Brahmā.| Brahmic merit or pure merit refers to an extraordinary type of merit which leads to rebirth in the realm of Brahmā. |Brahmic merit or pure merit refers to an extraordinary type of merit which leads to rebirth in the realm of Brahmā. 
ཚངས-པའི-གནས-པ-བཞི	 Love, compassion, joy, and equanimity.|Love, compassion, joy, and equanimity. 
ཚངས-སྒོ-ང	 Traditional Brahmanical term for the created universe.| Traditional Brahmanical term for the created universe. |Traditional Brahmanical term for the created universe. 
ཚངས-པའི-སྒོ-ང	 Metaphor, from the Purāṇas, for the world or universe.| Metaphor, from the Purāṇas, for the world or universe. |Metaphor, from the Purāṇas, for the world or universe. 
ཚངས-པའི-གཟེར-བུ-ཆེན-པོ	 Or “Great Spike of Purity,” the name of a bodhisattva. Possibly śaṅku is a misreading or misspelling of sanatku which would be “the bodhisattva Sanatkumāra” (Pali. Sanaṅkumāra) who was a being of the class of Mahābrahmās−in Vedic legend, one of the four or seven “mind-born” sons of Brahmā−and who appears in various suttas in the Pali canon.|Or “Great Spike of Purity,” the name of a bodhisattva. Possibly śaṅku is a misreading or misspelling of sanatku which would be “the bodhisattva Sanatkumāra” (Pali. Sanaṅkumāra) who was a being of the class of Mahābrahmās−in Vedic legend, one of the four or seven “mind-born” sons of Brahmā−and who appears in various suttas in the Pali canon. 
ཚངས-པའི-དབྱངས	 Name of a tathāgata. | Twenty-sixth of the thirty-two major marks.|Twenty-sixth of the thirty-two major marks. 
ཚངས-པའི-འཇིག-རྟེན-བཅུ-གཉིས	 See notes http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1428 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1513.|See notes http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1428 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1513. 
ཚངས-པ-བྱིན	 A monk who was a previous incarnation of Buddha Dīpaṃkara.|A monk who was a previous incarnation of Buddha Dīpaṃkara. 
ཚངས-པའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 A buddha in the southwestern direction.|A buddha in the southwestern direction. 
བྲམ-ཟེ	 A member of priestly caste. | A member of the Indian priestly caste, a Brahmin.| A member of the priestly class or caste from the four social divisions of India. | A person belonging to the highly respected priestly caste of classical Indian society. |A member of the Indian priestly caste, a Brahmin. 
ཚངས-པའི-མདུན-འདོན	 The second of the three paradises that are the paradises of the first dhyāna in the form realm.|The second of the three paradises that are the paradises of the first dhyāna in the form realm. 
ཚངས-པ-མདུན-ན-འདོན	 Second god realm of form, meaning “priest Brahmā.” Also called “Brahma­pari­ṣadya.”|Second god realm of form, meaning “priest Brahmā.” Also called “Brahma­pari­ṣadya.” 
ཚངས-པའི-གནས-བཞི	 The practices and resulting states of boundless loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity.| The practices and resulting states of boundless loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity. |The practices and resulting states of boundless loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity. 
ཚངས-འཁོར	 Second god realm of form, meaning “retinue of Brahmā.” Also called “Brahmapurohita.”|Second god realm of form, meaning “retinue of Brahmā.” Also called “Brahmapurohita.” 
ཚངས-པའི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 Name of two past buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the samādhi teachings.|Name of two past buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the samādhi teachings. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཡན-ལག-བདུན	 Mindfulness, discrimination, diligence, joy, pliability, absorption, and equanimity.|Mindfulness, discrimination, diligence, joy, pliability, absorption, and equanimity. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-བདུན	 Recollection, analysis of the dharmas, diligence, joy, pliancy, samādhi, equanimity.| Recollection, analysis of the dharmas, diligence, joy, pliancy, samādhi, equanimity. | The set of seven factors that characteristically manifest on the path of seeing. | The seven branches of enlightenment, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-164, comprise the branches of enlightenment that entail: (1) correct recollection, (2) correct doctrinal analysis, (3) correct perseverance, (4) correct delight, (5)correct mental and physical refinement, (6) correct meditative stability, and (7) correct equanimity. | These are the factors of remembrance (smṛti), discrimination between teachings (dharma­pravicaya), effort (vīrya), joy (prīti), ecstasy (praśrabdhi), concentration (samādhi), and equanimity (upekṣā). These seven form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment. |The set of seven factors that characteristically manifest on the path of seeing. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཆོས-སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-བདུན	 Thirty-seven practices that lead the practitioner to the awakened state: the four applications of mindfulness, the four thorough relinquishments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the eightfold path, and the seven branches of awakening. | Thirty-seven practices that lead the practitioner to the awakened state: the four applications of mindfulness, the four thorough relinquishments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five power‌s, the eightfold path, and the seven branches of awakening.| Thirty-seven practices that lead the practitioner to the awakened state: the four applications of mindfulness, the four thorough relinquishments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five power‌s, the eightfold path, and the seven branches of awakening. |Thirty-seven practices that lead the practitioner to the awakened state: the four applications of mindfulness, the four thorough relinquishments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the eightfold path, and the seven branches of awakening. 
ཚངས-པ-མཚུངས-པར-སྤྱོད-པ	Those who are engaged in the same celibate spiritual path as the protagonist.
ཕུར-བུ	 Both the deity of the planet Jupiter and the guru of the devas.|Both the deity of the planet Jupiter and the guru of the devas. 
འབྲས-བུ-ཆེ	 Twefth god realm of form, meaning “great fruition.”|Twefth god realm of form, meaning “great fruition.” 
འོད-འཕྲོ	The fourth bodhisattva bhūmi.
འོད-འཕྲོ-བ	 The fourth bodhisattva level.|The fourth bodhisattva bhūmi. 
དགའ-བ-བྱེད-པ	 Name of the thirty-ninth meditative stability.|Name of the thirty-ninth meditative stability. 
རྟིང-པ-ཡངས-པ	Sixth of the thirty-two major marks.
ཚེ-དང-ལྡན-པ	 A monk or mendicant of seniority.\nĀyuṣmān ({tshe dang ldan pa}) is a title of respect directed toward a monk or wandering mendicant who is venerable and in a position of seniority, but not a fully realized buddha. (In the Lalita­vistara, ch. 26, Śākyamuni famously rejects this title as a suitable term of address for himself. See, e.g., Dudjom Rinpoche 1991: 423). Āyuṣmān may imply one who has held monastic ordination for a significant number of years, and who has some level of realization, but is still “mortal” and tied to cyclic existence, in contrast to the buddhas, who are “immortal.” Even today Thai monks colloquially address each other, using ayusma for someone senior and avuso (“friend”) for someone junior. | A respectful form of address between monks and also lay companions of equal standing. Literally: one who has a [long] life. | Literally “long-lived.” A title referring to an ordained monk.| Literally “long-lived.” A title referring to an ordained monk. |A respectful form of address between monks and also lay companions of equal standing. Literally: one who has a [long] life. 
སང-རྒྱས	 Literally “Awakened One” in Sanskrit, the Tibetan translation interprets this as one who is “purified and perfected.”| Literally “Awakened One” in Sanskrit, the Tibetan translation interprets this as one who is “purified and perfected.” |Literally “Awakened One” in Sanskrit, the Tibetan translation interprets this as one who is “purified and perfected.” 
རང-སངས-རྒྱས	 A hermit buddha who attains individual enlightenment, either in solitude or in small groups, without relying on a teacher.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8). | An individual who, in his or her last life, attains realization by realizing the nature of dependent origination without relying upon a spiritual guide.| An individual who, in his or her last life, attains realization by realizing the nature of dependent origination without relying upon a spiritual guide. | Literally, “buddha for himself,” or “solitary realiser.” Those who attain buddhahood in a time when the Buddha’s doctrine is no longer available in the world, and who remain either in solitude or amongst peers, without teaching the path to liberation to others. They are sometimes called “rhinoceros-like” for their preference to stay in solitude.\npratyeka | Solitary awakened one. | Someone who has attained liberation entirely through his own contemplation as a result of progress in previous lives but, unlike a buddha, does not have the accumulated merit and motivation to teach others. | Someone who has attained liberation entirely through their own contemplation as a result of progress in previous lives but, unlike a buddha, does not have the accumulated merit and motivation to teach others. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-001.html#UT22084-051-001-731 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-001.html#UT22084-051-001-734.\npratyeka­buddhahood | Someone who obtains personal liberation through very little or no instruction from others; “solitary buddha” in some interpretations. | The disciples of the Buddha who followed the Lesser Vehicle (Hīnayāna). The term “pratyekabuddha” means that they “on their own” became “buddhas.” | “Solitary buddha,” so called because he attains nirvāṇa on his own. | “Solitary buddha.” Someone who has attained liberation entirely through their own contemplation, hence their alternate epithet, pratyayajina, which means one who has become a jina, or buddha, through dependence [on external factors that were contemplated upon]. This is the result of progress in previous lives but, unlike a buddha, they do not have the necessary accumulated merit nor the motivation to teach others. |An individual who, in his or her last life, attains realization by realizing the nature of dependent origination without relying upon a spiritual guide. 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ཆོས	 Can refer to the teaching of the Buddha as well as the dharmas that constitute an awakened being. | These qualities unique to a buddha are eighteen in number: the ten strengths; the four fearlessness; mindfulness of body, speech, and mind; and compassion.\nunique qualities of a buddha| These qualities unique to a buddha are eighteen in number: the ten strengths; the four fearlessness; mindfulness of body, speech, and mind; and compassion.\nunique qualities of a buddha |These qualities unique to a buddha are eighteen in number: the ten strengths; the four fearlessness; mindfulness of body, speech, and mind; and compassion.\nunique qualities of a buddha 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ཞིང	 Roughly, a synonym for “universe,” although Buddhist cosmology contains many universes of different types and dimensions. “Buddhafield” indicates, in regard to whatever type of world-sphere, that it is the field of influence of a particular Buddha. For a detailed discussion of these concepts, see Lamotte, Appendice, Note I. | The field of activity of a specific buddha.| The realm permeated by a buddha’s teaching and blessing. |The realm permeated by a buddha’s teaching and blessing. 
སངས-རྒྱས-བཅོམ-ལྡན-འདས	 Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni and general way of addressing the enlightened ones. See “Lord” or “Blessed One.” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121).| Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni and general way of addressing the enlightened ones. See “Lord” or “Blessed One.” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121). |Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni and general way of addressing the enlightened ones. See “Lord” or “Blessed One.” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121). 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-རིགས	 Lit. “family” or “lineage of the Buddha.” One becomes a member on the first bodhisattva stage. In another sense, all living beings belong to this exalted family because all have the capacity to wake up to enlightenment, conceiving its spirit within themselves and thenceforward seeking its realization (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#chapter-7).| Lit. “family” or “lineage of the Buddha.” One becomes a member on the first bodhisattva stage. In another sense, all living beings belong to this exalted family because all have the capacity to wake up to enlightenment, conceiving its spirit within themselves and thenceforward seeking its realization (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#chapter-7). |Lit. “family” or “lineage of the Buddha.” One becomes a member on the first bodhisattva stage. In another sense, all living beings belong to this exalted family because all have the capacity to wake up to enlightenment, conceiving its spirit within themselves and thenceforward seeking its realization (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#chapter-7). 
ཡང-དག-པར-རྫོགས-པའི-སངས-རྒྱས	 A term used to emphasize the superiority of buddhahood when contrasted with the achievement of the arhats and pratyekabuddhas. A samyaksaṃbuddha is considered superior by virtue of his compassionate activity, his omniscience and his ten special powers. | Lit. “perfectly accomplished Buddha.” Name of the Buddha.| Literally, “perfectly and completely awakened one,” this refers to a buddha who teaches the Dharma, as opposed to a pratyeka­buddha. | See “genuinely perfect buddha.”\ncompletely perfect buddhahood | The attainment of a buddha, who has gained total freedom from conditioned existence, overcome all tendencies imprinted on the mind as a result of a long association with afflicted mental states, and fully manifested all aspects of buddha body, speech, and mind. Also translated here as “completely perfect buddha.”\ngenuinely perfect buddhahood |Literally, “perfectly and completely awakened one,” this refers to a buddha who teaches the Dharma, as opposed to a pratyeka­buddha. 
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-སྐུ	 This indicates either an active / passive distinction in the buddha body of reality, or the underlying indivisible essence of the three buddha bodies.| This indicates either an active / passive distinction in the buddha body of reality, or the underlying indivisible essence of the three buddha bodies. |This indicates either an active / passive distinction in the buddha body of reality, or the underlying indivisible essence of the three buddha bodies. 
སྤྲུལ-པའི-སྐུ	 Nirmāṇakāya or body of manifestation. Aspect of buddhahood perceptible to ordinary individuals with good karma.| Nirmāṇakāya or body of manifestation. Aspect of buddhahood perceptible to ordinary individuals with good karma. | See “emanated incarnation.” | The buddha body of emanation is the visible and usually physical manifestation of fully enlightened beings which arises spontaneously from the expanse of the buddha body of reality, whenever appropriate‌, in accordance with the diverse dispositions of sentient beings. | The “body of transformation,” one of the three (sometimes four) bodies of the Buddha. |The buddha body of emanation is the visible and usually physical manifestation of fully enlightened beings which arises spontaneously from the expanse of the buddha body of reality, whenever appropriate‌, in accordance with the diverse dispositions of sentient beings. 
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-སྐུ	 According to the Lesser Vehicle, the buddha body of form refers to the thousand buddhas of the Auspicious Eon, including Śākyamuni. In the Great Vehicle, however, the term includes both the buddha body of perfect resource which appears in a pure light form to tenth level bodhisattvas and the buddha body of emanation which manifests physically for the sake of all beings. | See “rūpakāya.”| See “rūpakāya.” | Used to refer to the two form bodies of the Buddha, i.e. the nirmāṇakāya and the saṃbhogakāya. | “Form body.” The visible form of a buddha that is perceived by other beings, in contrast to his “Dharma body,” the dharmakāya, which is his enlightenment. |According to the Lesser Vehicle, the buddha body of form refers to the thousand buddhas of the Auspicious Eon, including Śākyamuni. In the Great Vehicle, however, the term includes both the buddha body of perfect resource which appears in a pure light form to tenth level bodhisattvas and the buddha body of emanation which manifests physically for the sake of all beings. 
རིགས-ཀྱི-ས	 Name of the second level attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.| Name of the second level attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282. |Name of the second level attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282. 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-མིག	 Fifth of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1129.\neye of the buddha| Fifth of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1129.\neye of the buddha |Fifth of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1129.\neye of the buddha 
སངས-རྒྱས-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 First of the ten recollections.| First of the ten recollections. |First of the ten recollections. 
སངས-རྒྱས-གྱི-ཆོས-མ-འདྲེས-པ	 There are eighteen such qualities unique to a buddha: the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the three mindfulnesses, and great compassion.| There are eighteen such qualities unique to a buddha: the ten powers, the four fearlessnesses, the three mindfulnesses, and great compassion. | There are eighteen such special qualities unique to a buddha. They are as follows: he never makes a mistake; he is never boisterous; he never forgets; his concentration never falters; he has no notion of distinctness; his equanimity is not due to lack of consideration; his motivation never falters; his endeavor never fails; his mindfulness never falters; he never abandons his concentration; his wisdom never decreases; his liberation never fails; all his physical actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; all his verbal actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; all his mental actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; his knowledge and vision perceive the past without any attachment or hindrance; his knowledge and vision perceive the future without any attachment or hindrance; and his knowledge and vision perceive the present without any attachment or hindrance. |There are eighteen such special qualities unique to a buddha. They are as follows: he never makes a mistake; he is never boisterous; he never forgets; his concentration never falters; he has no notion of distinctness; his equanimity is not due to lack of consideration; his motivation never falters; his endeavor never fails; his mindfulness never falters; he never abandons his concentration; his wisdom never decreases; his liberation never fails; all his physical actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; all his verbal actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; all his mental actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; his knowledge and vision perceive the past without any attachment or hindrance; his knowledge and vision perceive the future without any attachment or hindrance; and his knowledge and vision perceive the present without any attachment or hindrance. 
འབྲས-བུ-ཆོས-སྐུ	 Eighth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.| Eighth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. |Eighth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
ལོངས-སྤྱོད-རྫོགས-པའི-སྐུ	 Saṃbhogakāya or body of enjoyment. Aspect of buddhahood perceptible to bodhisattvas.| Saṃbhogakāya or body of enjoyment. Aspect of buddhahood perceptible to bodhisattvas. | The buddha body of perfect resource denotes the luminous, immaterial, and unimpeded reflection-like forms of enlightened mind, which become spontaneously present and naturally manifest to tenth level bodhisattvas. |The buddha body of perfect resource denotes the luminous, immaterial, and unimpeded reflection-like forms of enlightened mind, which become spontaneously present and naturally manifest to tenth level bodhisattvas. 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ཆོས-མ-འདྲེས-པ-བཅོ-བརྒྱད	 Eighteen qualities that are exclusively possessed by a buddha. These are listed in the Dharma­saṃgraha as follows: The tathāgata does not possess: (1) confusion; (2) noisiness; (3) forgetfulness; (4) loss of meditative equipoise; (5) cognition of distinctness; or (6) nonanalytical equanimity. A buddha totally lacks: (7) degeneration of motivatedness; (8) degeneration of perseverance; (9) degeneration of mindfulness; (10) degeneration of samādhi; (11) degeneration of prajñā; (12) degeneration of complete liberation; and (13) degeneration of seeing the wisdom of complete liberation. (14) A tathāgata’s every action of body is preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom; (15) every action of speech is preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom; (16) a buddha’s every action of mind is preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. (17) A tathāgata engages in seeing the past through wisdom that is unattached and unobstructed and (18) engages in seeing the present through wisdom that is unattached and unobstructed.| Eighteen qualities that are exclusively possessed by a buddha. These are listed in the Dharma­saṃgraha as follows: The tathāgata does not possess: (1) confusion; (2) noisiness; (3) forgetfulness; (4) loss of meditative equipoise; (5) cognition of distinctness; or (6) nonanalytical equanimity. A buddha totally lacks: (7) degeneration of motivatedness; (8) degeneration of perseverance; (9) degeneration of mindfulness; (10) degeneration of samādhi; (11) degeneration of prajñā; (12) degeneration of complete liberation; and (13) degeneration of seeing the wisdom of complete liberation. (14) A tathāgata’s every action of body is preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom; (15) every action of speech is preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom; (16) a buddha’s every action of mind is preceded by wisdom and followed through with wisdom. (17) A tathāgata engages in seeing the past through wisdom that is unattached and unobstructed and (18) engages in seeing the present through wisdom that is unattached and unobstructed. | Eighteen special features of a buddha’s behavior, realization, activity, and wisdom that are not shared by other beings. | Eighteen special features of a buddha’s physical state, realization, activity, and wisdom that are not shared by ordinary beings. | See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-257. | They are as follows: He never makes a mistake; he is never boisterous; he never forgets; his concentration never falters; he has no notion of diversity; his equanimity is not due to lack of consideration; his will never falters; his energy never fails; his mindfulness never falters; he never abandons his concentration; his wisdom never decreases; his liberation never fails; all his physical actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; all his verbal actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; all his mental actions are preceded and followed by wisdom; his knowledge and vision perceive the past without any attachment or hindrance; his knowledge and vision perceive the future without any attachment or hindrance; and his knowledge and vision perceive the present without any attachment or hindrance. |Eighteen special features of a buddha’s physical state, realization, activity, and wisdom that are not shared by ordinary beings. 
ཉེ-བའི-སྲས-ཆེན-བརྒྱད	 The eight bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī, Avalokiteśvara, Vajrapāṇi, Kṣitigarbha, Ākāśagarbha, Sarva­nivaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Maitreya, and Samantabhadra.| The eight bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī, Avalokiteśvara, Vajrapāṇi, Kṣitigarbha, Ākāśagarbha, Sarva­nivaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Maitreya, and Samantabhadra. |The eight bodhisattvas Mañjuśrī, Avalokiteśvara, Vajrapāṇi, Kṣitigarbha, Ākāśagarbha, Sarva­nivaraṇa­viṣkambhin, Maitreya, and Samantabhadra. 
ཞིང-ཁམས	This term denotes the operational field of a specific buddha, spontaneously arising as a result of their altruistic aspirations. (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-94).
སངས-རྒྱས-བསྐྱང	 (c. fourth century). A great Mādhyamika master, who was later regarded as the founder of the Prāsaṅgika sub-school.|(c. fourth century). A great Mādhyamika master, who was later regarded as the founder of the Prāsaṅgika sub-school. 
སངས-རྒྱས-འཚོ	 A wealthy householder from Śrāvastī who fathered Saṅgharakṣita.|A wealthy householder from Śrāvastī who fathered Saṅgharakṣita. 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཕལ-པོ-ཆེ	 Here, the name of a particular state of concentration (but also the title of a composite Mahāyāna sūtra or “family” of sūtras, Toh 44).| Here, the name of a particular state of concentration (but also the title of a composite Mahāyāna sūtra or “family” of sūtras, Toh 44). | See Avataṃsaka. |See Avataṃsaka. 
སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ཐེག-པ	 According to the Lotus Sūtra the one true way to buddhahood, equivalent to the Mahāyāna, which is the only teaching given by buddhas who do not live in a degenerate eon.|According to the Lotus Sūtra the one true way to buddhahood, equivalent to the Mahāyāna, which is the only teaching given by buddhas who do not live in a degenerate eon. 
སངས-རྒྱས-དཔལ	 Name of a bodhisattva, “Intellect-Splendor.” However, the Tibetan suggests “Buddha-” rather than “Buddhi-,” which would then mean “Buddha-Splendor.”|Name of a bodhisattva, “Intellect-Splendor.” However, the Tibetan suggests “Buddha-” rather than “Buddhi-,” which would then mean “Buddha-Splendor.” 
ཧི-ལ-མི-ཅི	Enhydra fluctuans.
སྦྱིན-སྲེག	 Fire ritual. | In “The Chapter on Going Forth,” this is presumably a reference to Vedic sacrifices, which brahmins offered to, and hence burned in, a sacred fire.| Ritual oblation offered into the fire. Unlike bali, homa in a tantric ritual is a repetitive act performed a prescribed number of times. |Fire ritual. 
བྱ-སྐྱིབས-སུ-བྱས-པ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཨ-པ-ར-ཛི-ཏ-དཀར-པོ	Clitoria ternatea (?)
དཔྱིད-བཟླ-དང-པོ	 The month of Caitra.|The month of Caitra. 
མཆོད-རྟེན	 A Buddhist monument and reliquary representing the enlightened mind of a buddha. | A Buddhist sacred monument usually holding the relics of a buddha or some highly revered Buddhist master. | A memorial mound for a buddha or a buddhist saint. | A sacred object representative of buddha mind and the buddha body of reality, originally constructed to hold the mortal remains of Śākyamuni Buddha. The symbolism of the stūpa is complex, and its design varies considerably throughout the Buddhist world.| A sacred object representative of buddha mind and the buddha body of reality, originally constructed to hold the mortal remains of Śākyamuni Buddha. The symbolism of the stūpa is complex, and its design varies considerably throughout the Buddhist world. | A shrine. The word is often used interchangably with stūpa but can be used more widely for various kinds of simple shrines such as those for sacred trees. | Reliquary for the remains of a buddha or enlightened master, and also a symbol for the mind or enlightenment of the Buddha. | Reliquary for the remains of a buddha or enlightened master. | Reliquary for the remains of the Buddha or holy beings that represents the body of the Buddha. | Sometimes synonymous with stūpa, but can refer to a temple that may or may not contain a stūpa, or any place or thing that is worthy of veneration. The Tibetan translation is identical for stūpa and caitya. | This can refer to a shrine or a reliquary. |A memorial mound for a buddha or a buddhist saint. 
འཁོར-ལོ	 Also rendered in this sūtra as “chakra.”| Also rendered in this sūtra as “chakra.” | Also rendered in this sūtra as “wheel.” |Also rendered in this sūtra as “wheel.” 
མེ-ཏོག-འཁོར-ལོ	 “Wheel”; here, a flower.|“Wheel”; here, a flower. 
ཁོར-ཡུག	 A mountain in this sūtra and many others; but, in systematized Buddhist cosmology, the name of the ring of mountains that surrounds the world. | In Buddhist cosmology this mountain range forms an outer ring at the edge of the flat disc that is the world. These mountains prevent the ocean from overflowing. In other contexts this name can refer to the entire disc of the world, the paradises above it, or, as in the Kṣiti­garbha Sūtra, to a mountain that contains the hells, also known as the Vaḍaba submarine mountain of fire. | Means “Periphery.” Name of mountain range that surrounds the world according to Buddhist cosmology.| Means “Periphery.” Name of mountain range that surrounds the world according to Buddhist cosmology. |A mountain in this sūtra and many others; but, in systematized Buddhist cosmology, the name of the ring of mountains that surrounds the world. 
འཁོར-ཡུག	 Name of a mountain range in Buddhist cosmology. | Unidentified mountain, probably synonymous with Cakravaḍa, which sometimes refers to the mountain that leads to hell.| Unidentified mountain, probably synonymous with Cakravaḍa, which sometimes refers to the mountain that leads to hell. | “Circular mass.” There are at least three interpretations of what this name refers to. In the Kṣitigarbha Sutra it is a mountain that contains the hells, in which case it is equivalent to the Vaḍaba submarine mountain of fire, also said to be the entrance to the hells. More commonly it is the name of the outer ring of mountains at the edge of the flat disc that is the world, with Sumeru in the center. This is also equated with Vaḍaba, the heat of which evaporates the ocean so that it does not overflow. Jambudvīpa, the world of humans is in this sea to Sumeru’s south. However, it is also used to mean the entire disc, including Sumeru and the paradises above it. |“Circular mass.” There are at least three interpretations of what this name refers to. In the Kṣitigarbha Sutra it is a mountain that contains the hells, in which case it is equivalent to the Vaḍaba submarine mountain of fire, also said to be the entrance to the hells. More commonly it is the name of the outer ring of mountains at the edge of the flat disc that is the world, with Sumeru in the center. This is also equated with Vaḍaba, the heat of which evaporates the ocean so that it does not overflow. Jambudvīpa, the world of humans is in this sea to Sumeru’s south. However, it is also used to mean the entire disc, including Sumeru and the paradises above it. 
འཁོར-ལོས-སྒྱུར-བ	 A king with a magical wheel, and wherever it rolls becomes his kingdom, so that he may rule over one to four continents. | A king with a magical wheel—wherever it rolls becomes his kingdom, so that he may rule over one to four continents. | Literally “wheel-wielder,” denotes a powerful being who has control over vast regions of the universe.| Literally “wheel-wielder,” denotes a powerful being who has control over vast regions of the universe. |A king with a magical wheel—wherever it rolls becomes his kingdom, so that he may rule over one to four continents. 
གོ-སྐོན	To call up reserves or members of a standing army.
ཞི-བ	 Also translated here as “calm” and “calmness.” | Also translated here as “calm” and “peace.” | In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. | Peace; one of the four main types of enlightened activity. | peace| peace |Also translated here as “calmness” and “peace.” 
རབ-ཏུ-ཞི-བ-རྣམ-པར-དུལ-བའི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 A bodhisattva god in the assembly receiving Buddha Śākyamuni’s teachings.| A bodhisattva god in the assembly receiving Buddha Śākyamuni’s teachings. |A bodhisattva god in the assembly receiving Buddha Śākyamuni’s teachings. 
ཕྲ-མ-རྡོ-རྗེ-མ	Consort of Yellow Acala.
བྱིན-པ-རི-དགས-ཨེནེཡའི-ལྟ-བུ-དང-ལྡན-པ	Eighth of the thirty-two major marks.
ཙམ-པ	 The capital of Aṅga.|The capital of Aṅga. 
ཙམ-པ-ཀ	 A tree, Magnolia champaca, with attractive cream or yellow-orange flowers used in India for offerings, decoration, and perfume. | Magnolia campaca.| Magnolia campaca. |A tree, Magnolia champaca, with attractive cream or yellow-orange flowers used in India for offerings, decoration, and perfume. 
ག-བུར	Cinnamomum camphora.
ཀ-སྟུ-ར	Cinnamomum camphora.
ཙ-མུཎྜཱ	 Normally regarded as a Hindu goddess (a form of Durgā), in the CMT she is invoked to protect from theft.|Normally regarded as a Hindu goddess (a form of Durgā), in the CMT she is invoked to protect from theft. 
གདོལ-པ	 The lowest of the untouchables in the social system of ancient India.|The lowest of the untouchables in the social system of ancient India. 
གཏུམ-པོ-ཁྲོ-བོ-ཆེན-པོ	 The chief deity of the CMT.|The chief deity of the CMT. 
གཏུམ-པོ-ཁྲོ-བོ	 The chief deity of the CMT.|The chief deity of the CMT. 
གཏུམ-པོ	 The chief deity of the CMT.|The chief deity of the CMT. 
གཏུམ-མོ	 Another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa’s consort.|Another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa’s consort. 
མེ-ཏོག-ཟླ-བ	 “Moon”; here, a flower.| “Moon”; here, a flower. |“Moon”; here, a flower. 
ཟླ-བ	 The deity of the moon, as well as the moon itself. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha, when Avalokiteśvara emanates Candra, it is the deity that is meant.| The deity of the moon, as well as the moon itself. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha, when Avalokiteśvara emanates Candra, it is the deity that is meant. | The god of the moon; the moon personified. |The god of the moon; the moon personified. 
ཟླ-བའི-སྒྲོན-མ	 Name of the forty-seventh meditative stability.| Name of the forty-seventh meditative stability. |Name of the forty-seventh meditative stability. 
ཟླ-གདུགས	 (1) Chief of the Licchavi. (2) Son of the king Ratnacchattra, mentioned in the former-life story told by the Buddha to Śakra in Chapter 12.|(1) Chief of the Licchavi. (2) Son of the king Ratnacchattra, mentioned in the former-life story told by the Buddha to Śakra in Chapter 12. 
ཟླ-བའི-གླིང	 A well-known site of pilgrimage in Bengal. Candradvīpa was a prosperous kingdom with Buddhist sites, located on what is now the south coast of Bangladesh, centered on the Barisal district.|A well-known site of pilgrimage in Bengal. Candradvīpa was a prosperous kingdom with Buddhist sites, located on what is now the south coast of Bangladesh, centered on the Barisal district. 
ཟླ-བ-གྲགས-པ	 (c. sixth century). The most important Mādhyamika philosopher after Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva, he refined the philosophical methods of the school to such a degree that later members of the tradition considered him one of the highest authorities on the subject of the profound nature of reality. | A prominent seventh-century master of the Madhyamaka (Middle Way) tradition. | The famed seventh-century Indian Buddhist master known most for his Madhyamaka treatises commenting on the works of the second- to third-century master Nāgārjuna. In Tibet, where Candrakīrti’s exegetical writings form the foundation for the study of Indian Madhyamaka thought, he is celebrated as a proponent of the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka approach in particular.| The famed seventh-century Indian Buddhist master known most for his Madhyamaka treatises commenting on the works of the second- to third-century master Nāgārjuna. In Tibet, where Candrakīrti’s exegetical writings form the foundation for the study of Indian Madhyamaka thought, he is celebrated as a proponent of the Prāsaṅgika Madhyamaka approach in particular. |(c. sixth century). The most important Mādhyamika philosopher after Nāgārjuna and Āryadeva, he refined the philosophical methods of the school to such a degree that later members of the tradition considered him one of the highest authorities on the subject of the profound nature of reality. 
ཟླ-འོད	 A buddha. | The young man of Rājagrha who is the principal interlocutor for the Samādhirājasūtra. He is frequently addressed as “youth” or “young man,” (Skt. kumāra; Tib. {gzhon nu}); see “the youth Candraprabha.”| The young man of Rājagrha who is the principal interlocutor for the Samādhirājasūtra. He is frequently addressed as “youth” or “young man,” (Skt. kumāra; Tib. {gzhon nu}); see “the youth Candraprabha.” |A buddha. 
ཟླ-བའི-འོད	 One of the four retinue deities of Arapacana.|One of the four retinue deities of Arapacana. 
ཟླ-འོད-གཞོན-ནུ	 The young man of Rājagrha who is the principal interlocutor for the Samādhirājasūtra. He is frequently addressed as “youth” or “young man,” (Skt. kumāra; Tib. {gzhon nu}).| The young man of Rājagrha who is the principal interlocutor for the Samādhirājasūtra. He is frequently addressed as “youth” or “young man,” (Skt. kumāra; Tib. {gzhon nu}). |The young man of Rājagrha who is the principal interlocutor for the Samādhirājasūtra. He is frequently addressed as “youth” or “young man,” (Skt. kumāra; Tib. {gzhon nu}). 
ཉི-ཟླ-སྒྲོན-མ	 A buddha in the distant past. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. |A buddha in the distant past. 
ཟླ-བའི-སྙིང-པོ	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
ཉི-ཟླ-དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-འོད-དཔལ	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
གཟུགས-སུ-རུང-བ	 capacity to assume physical forms|capacity to assume physical forms 
གཟུང-བའི-ཚིག	 This term can also mean “comprehensible speech,” in contrast to {gzung ba med pa'i tshig} (agrahaṇapada) or “incomprehensible speech.” See Negi (1993-2005): 5505.|This term can also mean “comprehensible speech,” in contrast to {gzung ba med pa'i tshig} (agrahaṇapada) or “incomprehensible speech.” See Negi (1993-2005): 5505. 
བརྐུས-པ	Someone seized and held captive by another government, as with prisoners of war.
སྤྱོད-པ-ཅན	 A tīrthika-style renunciate. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1896.|A tīrthika-style renunciate. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1896. 
སྤྱོད-པ-བ	 A non-Buddhist wanderer, often grouped with the Parivrājakas.|A non-Buddhist wanderer, often grouped with the Parivrājakas. 
ལྷོག-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
སྤྱོད-པའི-རྒྱུད	 “Conduct tantras,” the second, middle category of the three outer tantras according to the new translation ({gsar ma}) traditions; in old translation ({rnying ma}) classifications the term Upa- or Ubhaya-tantra is more often used.|“Conduct tantras,” the second, middle category of the three outer tantras according to the new translation ({gsar ma}) traditions; in old translation ({rnying ma}) classifications the term Upa- or Ubhaya-tantra is more often used. 
སྦྱོད-རྒྱུད	 The second class of tantra in most systems of tantra classification (the other classes being, in the fivefold classification, Kriyātantra, Yogatantra, Yogottaratantra, and Yoganiruttaratantra).|The second class of tantra in most systems of tantra classification (the other classes being, in the fivefold classification, Kriyātantra, Yogatantra, Yogottaratantra, and Yoganiruttaratantra). 
ཨེ-རཎྜ	Ricinus communis.
རྒྱལ-ཆེན-བཞིའི-རིས	 First god realm of desire, meaning “abode of the four great kings.” | The lowest of the six heavens of the desire realm.| The lowest of the six heavens of the desire realm. |First god realm of desire, meaning “abode of the four great kings.” 
རྒྱུ	The primary cause.
ཁང-བརྩེགས	The Sanskrit term vimāna can refer to a multi-storied mansion or palace, or even an estate, but is more often used in the sense of a celestial chariot of the gods, sometimes taking the form of a multi-storied palace; hence the Tibetan translation, {khang brtsegs}, literally “storied house.”
སྣམ-སྦྱར	 The outer robe worn by fully ordained monks on formal occasions, including teachings and begging for alms, is fashioned of patches, their number indicative of the monastic order to which they belong‌. See, e.g., Zhang Yisun et al (1985): 1594–1595.|One of a Buddhist monk’s three robes 
དབྱིངས-སུ-ངེས-པ	 Name of the eighth meditative stability.| Name of the eighth meditative stability. |Name of the eighth meditative stability. 
འགོག-པ	 The third Noble Truth, equivalent to nirvāṇa.|The third Noble Truth, equivalent to nirvāṇa. 
ཁྱད-པར-དགའ-བ	 The fourth of the four types of joy.| The fourth of the four types of joy. |The fourth of the four types of joy. 
འགོག-པ-འཕགས-པའི-བདེན-པ	 Third of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the cessation of suffering\n[truth of] the cessation of suffering| Third of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the cessation of suffering\n[truth of] the cessation of suffering |Third of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the cessation of suffering\n[truth of] the cessation of suffering 
འགོག-པ-ཤེས-པ	 Seventh of the eleven aspects of knowledge.| Seventh of the eleven aspects of knowledge. |Seventh of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཟག-པ-ཟད-པ-ཤེས-པ-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Sixth of the six extrasensory powers.| Sixth of the six extrasensory powers. |Sixth of the six extrasensory powers. 
འདུ-ཤེས-དང-ཚོར-བ-འགོག-པ-བསྒྲུབས-ཏེ-གནས-པ	 Eighth of the eight aspects of liberation.| Eighth of the eight aspects of liberation. |Eighth of the eight aspects of liberation. 
ཕུབ-མའི-སྦྱིན-སྲེག	 Type of homa where chaff fire is used or chaff is offered. Sometimes mixed with clarified butter.\nhoma of chaff| Type of homa where chaff fire is used or chaff is offered. Sometimes mixed with clarified butter.\nhoma of chaff |Type of homa where chaff fire is used or chaff is offered. Sometimes mixed with clarified butter.\nhoma of chaff 
འདུན-པ	 A monk absent from an official saṅgha function, such as the purification, must send word he will consent to any actions taken in his absence. Such consent is sent by proxy.| One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. |A monk absent from an official saṅgha function, such as the purification, must send word he will consent to any actions taken in his absence. Such consent is sent by proxy. 
རྩ	A prāṇa channel in the subtle body.
ཚངས-པར-སྤྱོད-པ	 Lit. “brahma conduct,” this denotes the conduct of those who have renounced worldly life and entered the ordained Buddhist Sangha to devote themselves to spiritual study and practice.| Lit. “brahma conduct,” this denotes the conduct of those who have renounced worldly life and entered the ordained Buddhist Sangha to devote themselves to spiritual study and practice. | The chaste life of the monastics. |The chaste life of the monastics. 
བཙོངས-པ	Someone obtained through sale.
གདུགས-དམ-པའི-དཔལ	 A buddha of the northwest.|A buddha of the northwest. 
ཤུག-པ	Also known as Wild Himalayan Cherry, Sour Cherry, and Costus Speciosus.
སྟོང-གི-འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས	A universe in Buddhist cosmology consisting of one thousand smaller world systems.
སྟོང-ཆུང-ངུའི-འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས	A series of one thousand parallel human worlds, according to traditional Indian cosmology.
ཆོས-ཉིད-ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས	 The 9th century Tibetan translator of this text.| The 9th century Tibetan translator of this text. |Tibetan translator of this sūtra in the ninth century, also well known for his collaboration in compiling the Mahāvyutpatti (Skt.-Tib. dictionary). 
རྟག-པའི-རིམས	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཀེ-ཀེ-རུ	This stone is not a type of beryl in spite of its name. The Tibetan has adopted the Prakrit form of its name: ke ke ru. It is the third hardest gemstone. It comes in three main varieties: the eponymous yellow or green chrysoberyl; cat’s eye (cymophane), which is light green or yellow with a band of light, resembling a cat’s eye; and the third form, alexandrite, which can change color from red to green to yellow according to the light. All three kinds have been mined since ancient times, in Sri Lanka in particular.
སྲུབ-པའི-སྦྱོར-བ	A method of generating a deity in visualization (out of male and female sexual fluids mixed in the vagina).
བི-ཅི-ཀུཎྜ-ལི	 God of wealth.|God of wealth. 
རྐྱེན-གྱི-རྒྱལ-བ	 A being who attains victory (i.e. awakening) through specific circumstances. Almost certainly a synonym for a solitary buddha.|A being who attains victory (i.e. awakening) through specific circumstances. Almost certainly a synonym for a solitary buddha. 
ནག-པ	 The twelfth (sometimes the fourteenth) lunar asterism.|The twelfth (sometimes the fourteenth) lunar asterism. 
བཱི-ཛ-པཱུ-ར-ཀ	Citrus medica.
མ-ཏུ-ལུང-ཀ	Citrus medica.
སེམས-ཙམ	 A name of the Vijñānavāda school of Mahāyāna Buddhist philosophy.|A name of the Vijñānavāda school of Mahāyāna Buddhist philosophy. 
སྣ-ཚོགས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
སྐད-ཅིག-མ-གཅིག-གིས-མངོན-པར-རྟོགས-པ	 Seventh of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.|Seventh of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
མཐར-གྱིས-པའི-མངོན-རྟོགས	 Sixth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.|Sixth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
རྩེ-མོར-ཕྱིན-པའི-མངོན-རྟོགས	 Fifth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.|Fifth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
རྣམ-ཀུན-མངོན-རྫོགས-རྟོགས-པ	 Fourth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.| Fourth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. |Fourth of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
འདུ-ཤེས	 It is perceptions that recognize and identify forms and objects, differentiating and designating them.| One of the five aggregates. It is also one of the five mental omnipresent (sarvatraga, {kun 'gro}) mental factors that necessarily accompany any cognition. | See “aggregate.” | The mental process of identifying various perceived phenomena. One of the five skandhas. | The third of the five aggregates. |The term is used in an ordinary sense in Sanskrit to mean “notion,” “sign,” “conception,” “clear understanding.” It is also used more specifically in Buddhist scholastic contexts in the phrase “the aggregate of perceptions” (saṃjñāskandha). 
ཀ-ཊ-ཀཾ	Strychnos potatorum.
ཚེམས-ཐགས-བཟང	Twenty-second of the thirty-two major marks.
ཁ-དོག-རན-པ	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. In this case, a “fitting color” has equal shades of blue, yellow, and saffron while ‘ill-colored” means exclusively blue, yellow, or saffron.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྤྲིན	 The tenth and highest of the levels in the bodhisattva path.| The tenth and highest of the levels in the bodhisattva path. | The tenth bodhisattva bhūmi. | The tenth bodhisattva level. |The tenth bodhisattva level. 
ཆོས-སྤྲིན	 The tenth bodhisattva bhūmi.| The tenth bodhisattva bhūmi. |The tenth bodhisattva bhūmi. 
ཨུ-དུམ-བཱ-ར	 Ficus glomerata.|Ficus glomerata. 
ཤེས-པ	 Also translated as “cognition.”|Also translated as “knowledge.” 
མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Special powers of which five, acquired through the meditative contemplations (dhyāna), are considered mundane (laukika) and can be attained to some extent by outsider yogis as well as Buddhist arhats and bodhisattvas; and a sixth—being acquired through a bodhisattva’s realization, or by buddhas alone according to some accounts—is supramundane (lokottara). The first five are: divine eye or vision (divyacakṣu), divine hearing (divyaśrotra), knowledge of others’ minds (paracittajñāna), knowledge of former (and future) lives (pūrva­[para]­nivāsānu­smṛti­jñāna), and knowledge of magical operations (ṛddhi­vidhi­jñāna). The sixth, supramundane one is knowledge of the exhaustion of defilements (āsravakṣaya­jñāna).| The higher cognitions are listed as either five or six. The first five are: clairvoyance (divine sight), divine hearing, knowing how to manifest miracles, remembering previous lives, knowing what is in the minds of others. A sixth, knowing that all defects have been eliminated, is often added. The first five are attained through dhyāna, and are sometimes described as worldly, as they can be attained to some extent by non-Buddhist yogis; while the sixth is supramundane and attained only by realization—by bodhisattvas, or according to some accounts only by buddhas. | There are six kinds of higher knowledge: divine sight, divine hearing, knowing how to manifest miracles, remembering previous lives, knowing what is in the minds of others, and knowing that all defects have been eliminated. Sometimes listed as five, without the sixth. |The higher cognitions are listed as either five or six. The first five are: clairvoyance (divine sight), divine hearing, knowing how to manifest miracles, remembering previous lives, knowing what is in the minds of others. A sixth, knowing that all defects have been eliminated, is often added. The first five are attained through dhyāna, and are sometimes described as worldly, as they can be attained to some extent by non-Buddhist yogis; while the sixth is supramundane and attained only by realization—by bodhisattvas, or according to some accounts only by buddhas. 
ཡེ-ཤེས	 Specifically refers to an awakened being’s wisdom. Also translated as “transcendental wisdom,” “original wakefulness,” and so forth.| Specifically refers to an awakened being’s wisdom. Also translated as “transcendental wisdom,” “original wakefulness,” and so forth. | This is knowledge of the nonconceptual and transcendental which is realized by those attaining higher stages. | This term denotes the modality of buddha mind. Although all sentient beings possess the potential for actualizing pristine cognition within their mental continuum, the psychological confusions and deluded tendencies which defile the mind obstruct the natural expression of these inherent potentials, making them appear instead as aspects of mundane consciousness. | gnoses |This term denotes the modality of buddha mind. Although all sentient beings possess the potential for actualizing pristine cognition within their mental continuum, the psychological confusions and deluded tendencies which defile the mind obstruct the natural expression of these inherent potentials, making them appear instead as aspects of mundane consciousness. 
ཡིད-ཀྱི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Just as the five sense cognitions occur on the basis of the five sense faculties, mental cognition is the cognition that occurs on the basis of the mind faculty. | The Abhidharma speaks of five consciousnesses that grasp physical objects (form, sound, smells, tastes, bodily sensations) and are correlated with their respective physical sense faculties (indriya, {dbang po}), i.e. the eye, ear, etc. The mental consciousness, on the other hand, is said to have as its faculty simply the mind (manas, {yid}). It grasps all that exists, including what is presented by the physical consciousnesses as well as mental and abstract objects. These six consciousnesses, added to the twelve bases of cognition, constitute the Abhidharma schema of eighteen domains or spheres (dhātu, {khams}).| The Abhidharma speaks of five consciousnesses that grasp physical objects (form, sound, smells, tastes, bodily sensations) and are correlated with their respective physical sense faculties (indriya, {dbang po}), i.e. the eye, ear, etc. The mental consciousness, on the other hand, is said to have as its faculty simply the mind (manas, {yid}). It grasps all that exists, including what is presented by the physical consciousnesses as well as mental and abstract objects. These six consciousnesses, added to the twelve bases of cognition, constitute the Abhidharma schema of eighteen domains or spheres (dhātu, {khams}). |Just as the five sense cognitions occur on the basis of the five sense faculties, mental cognition is the cognition that occurs on the basis of the mind faculty. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-ཏོག	 Name of the fifty-first meditative stability.| Name of the fifty-first meditative stability. |Name of the fifty-first meditative stability. 
རྣམ-པར-གྲོལ-བ-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པའམ-རྣམ-པར-གྲོལ-བའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-མཐོང-བ-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ	 Twelfth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Twelfth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Twelfth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
ད-ལྟར-བྱུང-བའི-དུས-ལ-མ-ཆགས-མ-ཐོགས-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-གཟིགས-པར-འཇུག-གོ	 Eighteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Eighteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Eighteenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
འདས-པའི-དུས-ལ-མ-ཆགས-མ-ཐོགས-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-གཟིགས-པར-འཇུག-གོ	 Sixteeenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Sixteeenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Sixteeenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
མ-འོངས-པའི-དུས-ལ-མ-ཆགས-མ-ཐོགས-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-གཟིགས-པར-འཇུག-གོ	 Seventeenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.| Seventeenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. |Seventeenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས	 Also translated here as “cognize.”\nbe fully aware\nis fully aware\nare fully aware|Also translated here as “be fully aware.” 
ཀཱར-ཥཱ-པ-ཎ	A coin of variable value, sometimes worth as little as a burnt bun and other times equal to twenty gold coins.
ཐལ-གོང-རྒྱས-པ	Seventeenth of the thirty-two major marks.
ཚོགས	 This term denotes the two provisions of merit and pristine cognition which are gathered by bodhisattvas on the path to manifestly perfect buddhahood. The fulfilment of these two provisions constitutes the fruition of the entire path, resulting respectively in the maturation of the buddha body of form and the buddha body of reality.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2078).|In the context of the psychophysical constituents, refers to the combination of individual sense-consciousnesses related to the five senses, and that of the mind, making five or six constituents depending on the context (and in some texts more) that collectively constitute “consciousness.” 
འཇིག-ཚོགས	 Object of egoistic or materialist interest (satkāyadṛṣṭi). See “egoistic views.” | The transitory collection of the five aggregates, the basis for the view of a self or that which belongs to a self.|The transitory collection of the five aggregates, the basis for the view of a self or that which belongs to a self. 
མདོ-སྡེ	 The collection of discourses of the Buddha. | Usually referring to a discourse by the Buddha; sometimes to just a few sentences by the Buddha; or also, when not referring to the words of the Buddha, any concise doctrinal statement.| Usually referring to a discourse by the Buddha; sometimes to just a few sentences by the Buddha; or also, when not referring to the words of the Buddha, any concise doctrinal statement. |The collection of discourses of the Buddha. 
འདུས-པ-ལས-གྱུར-པའི-ནད	Fourth of the four kinds of disease.
དགེ-སློང-ཚུར-ཤོག-གི-བསྙེན-པར-རྫོགས-པ	 The informal ordination first employed by the Buddha.\nCome, join me, monk| The informal ordination first employed by the Buddha.\nCome, join me, monk |The informal ordination first employed by the Buddha.\nCome, join me, monk 
གླེགས-བམ-དུ-ཆུད-པར-བྱེད-པ	committed to writing\ncommitted it to writing\nhave committed to writing
ཡི-གེར-འབྲི	committed to writing\ncommitted it to writing\nhave committed to writing
དམ-ཚིག	 A tantric vow or commitment. | The bond with the master, deity, and the mantra, based on the pledge or commitment made during an empowerment. | The level of commitments specifically associated with tantric practice. Also rendered here as “commitment.” | The level of commitments specifically associated with tantric practice. Also rendered here as “samaya.” | vows| vows |A tantric vow or commitment. 
ཤ-རི-ཁཎྜ	Euphorbia neriifolia.
ཐུན-མོང-གི-ཆོས	 Common phenomena from the perspective of ordinary persons, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-417, include the following: the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions, and the [first] five extrasensory powers.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).|Common phenomena from the perspective of ordinary persons, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-417, include the following: the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions, and the [first] five extrasensory powers.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
སྙིང-རྗེ	Second of the four immeasurable aspirations.
སྙིང-རྗེ-ཆེན-པོ	 A specific state of mind resulting from the four abodes of Brahma and defined as the wish to liberate all beings from suffering. | See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-255.| See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-255. | This refers to one of the two central qualities of buddhas or high bodhisattvas: their feeling born of the wish for all living beings to be free of suffering and to attain the supreme happiness. It is important to note that this great compassion has nothing to do with any sentimental emotion such as that stimulated by such a reflection as “Oh, the poor creatures! How they are suffering!” On the contrary, great compassion is accompanied by the clear awareness that ultimately there are no such things as living beings, suffering, etc., in reality. Thus it is a sensitivity that does not entertain any dualistic notion of subject and object; indeed, such an unlimited sensitivity might best be termed “empathy.” |This refers to one of the two central qualities of buddhas or high bodhisattvas: their feeling born of the wish for all living beings to be free of suffering and to attain the supreme happiness. It is important to note that this great compassion has nothing to do with any sentimental emotion such as that stimulated by such a reflection as “Oh, the poor creatures! How they are suffering!” On the contrary, great compassion is accompanied by the clear awareness that ultimately there are no such things as living beings, suffering, etc., in reality. Thus it is a sensitivity that does not entertain any dualistic notion of subject and object; indeed, such an unlimited sensitivity might best be termed “empathy.” 
ཡུལ-ལས-བྱེད-པའི-དགེ-འདུན	 A monk to whom one may give one’s proxy in case one cannot attend a official saṅgha function.|A monk to whom one may give one’s proxy in case one cannot attend a official saṅgha function. 
རིན-ཆེན-ཀུན-ནས-བསགས-པ	 The buddha realm in which Avalokiteśvara will become a fully enlightened buddha. Probably the same as Sarvaratnasannicaya attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra, where the Tibetan rendering is {rin po che tham cad yang dag par sags pa}.| The buddha realm in which Avalokiteśvara will become a fully enlightened buddha. Probably the same as Sarvaratnasannicaya attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra, where the Tibetan rendering is {rin po che tham cad yang dag par sags pa}. |The buddha realm in which Avalokiteśvara will become a fully enlightened buddha. Probably the same as Sarvaratnasannicaya attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra, where the Tibetan rendering is {rin po che tham cad yang dag par sags pa}. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-རྟོག-པ	 A complete projection of the mind which has no valid basis in reality.| A complete projection of the mind which has no valid basis in reality. | See “conceptualization.” |A complete projection of the mind which has no valid basis in reality. 
ཡང-དག-པ-དང-ལོག-པ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡང-དག-པར-སེལ-བ	 Name of the ninety-sixth meditative stability.|Name of the ninety-sixth meditative stability. 
རབ-ཏུ-གདོན-མི-ཟ-བ-པད-མོ-རྒྱས-པའི-སྐུ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
སྤྱན-གྱི-ཚོགས-ཡོངས-སུ-རྫོགས-པ	Twenty-ninth of the thirty-two major marks.
རྫོགས-པའི-རིམ-པ	The second of the two stages of tantric sādhana practiced. Its practices are specific to individual tantric systems but typically include sexual yogas, the consumption of illicit substances, manipulation of the subtle energetic anatomy or resting in an uncontrived state.\ncompletion phase
འདུས-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མདོག-གསལ-བ-དག	Thirty-fifth of the eighty minor marks.
བསམ-གཏན-གྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 Fifth of the six transcendent perfections.| Fifth of the six transcendent perfections. |Fifth of the six transcendent perfections. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སེམས-བསྐྱེད-པ	 This can also be rendered by “initiation of…” because it means the mental event occurring when a living being, having been exposed to the teaching of the Buddha or of his magical emanations (e.g., Vimalakīrti), realizes simultaneously his own level of conditioned ignorance, i.e., that his habitual stream of consciousness is like sleep compared to that of one who has awakened from ignorance; the possibility of his own attainment of a higher state of consciousness; and the necessity of attaining it in order to liberate other living beings from their stupefaction. Having realized this possibility, he becomes inspired with the intense ambition to attain, and that is called the “conception of the spirit of enlightenment.” “Spirit” is preferred to “mind” because the mind of enlightenment should rather be the mind of the Buddha, and to “thought” because a “thought of enlightenment” can easily be produced without the initiation of any sort of new resolve or awareness. “Will” also serves very well here.\nconceiving the spirit of enlightenment\nconceive the spirit of enlightenment| This can also be rendered by “initiation of…” because it means the mental event occurring when a living being, having been exposed to the teaching of the Buddha or of his magical emanations (e.g., Vimalakīrti), realizes simultaneously his own level of conditioned ignorance, i.e., that his habitual stream of consciousness is like sleep compared to that of one who has awakened from ignorance; the possibility of his own attainment of a higher state of consciousness; and the necessity of attaining it in order to liberate other living beings from their stupefaction. Having realized this possibility, he becomes inspired with the intense ambition to attain, and that is called the “conception of the spirit of enlightenment.” “Spirit” is preferred to “mind” because the mind of enlightenment should rather be the mind of the Buddha, and to “thought” because a “thought of enlightenment” can easily be produced without the initiation of any sort of new resolve or awareness. “Will” also serves very well here.\nconceiving the spirit of enlightenment\nconceive the spirit of enlightenment |This can also be rendered by “initiation of…” because it means the mental event occurring when a living being, having been exposed to the teaching of the Buddha or of his magical emanations (e.g., Vimalakīrti), realizes simultaneously his own level of conditioned ignorance, i.e., that his habitual stream of consciousness is like sleep compared to that of one who has awakened from ignorance; the possibility of his own attainment of a higher state of consciousness; and the necessity of attaining it in order to liberate other living beings from their stupefaction. Having realized this possibility, he becomes inspired with the intense ambition to attain, and that is called the “conception of the spirit of enlightenment.” “Spirit” is preferred to “mind” because the mind of enlightenment should rather be the mind of the Buddha, and to “thought” because a “thought of enlightenment” can easily be produced without the initiation of any sort of new resolve or awareness. “Will” also serves very well here.\nconceiving the spirit of enlightenment\nconceive the spirit of enlightenment 
སྤྲོས-པ	 An etymologically obscure term, which can mean elaboration, diffusion, or expansion, but is basically describing the mind’s conceptualization, and is always connected to the words for notions and ideas, and mental fabrications.|This term denotes the presence of discursive or conceptual thought processes. Their absence or deconstruction is characteristic of the realization of emptiness or actual reality. 
རྣམ-པར-རྟོག-པ	 Also translated here as “conceptual notion.” | Any type of dualistic concept or idea.| Any type of dualistic concept or idea. | This brings up another important group of words that has never been treated systematically in translation: vikalpa, parikalpa, samāropa, adhyāropa, kalpanā, samjñā, and prapāñca. All of these refer to mental functions that tend to superimpose upon reality, either relative or ultimate, a conceptualized reality fabricated by the subjective mind. Some translators have tended to lump these together under the rubric “discursive thought,” which leads to the misleading notion that all thought is bad, something to be eliminated, and that sheer “thoughtlessness” is “enlightenment,” or whatever higher state is desired. According to Buddhist scholars, thought in itself is simply a function, and only thought that is attached to its own content over and above the relative object, i.e., “egoistic” thought, is bad and to be eliminated. Therefore we have chosen a set of words for the seven Skt. terms: respectively, “conceptualization,” “imagination,” “presumption,” “exaggeration,” “construction,” “conception” or “notion,” and “fabrication.” This does not mean that these words are not somewhat interchangeable or that another English word might not be better in certain contexts; it only represents an attempt to achieve consistency with the original usages. |Also translated here as “false imagination.” 
མཚན-མ	 Also translated as “sign.” | Also translated here as “mental image.”|Literally “signs,” or attributes. 
མཚུངས-ལྡན	This denotes the five aspects of concomitance between mind and its mental states, which may concern (1) location or support ({gnas sam rten}), (2) objective referent ({dmigs pa}), (3) sensum ({rnam pa}), (4) time ({dus}), or (5) substance ({rdzas}).\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1972).
མངོན-པར-འདུ-བྱེད	 The term is used in this text in the same way as saṃskāra (formative factors, q.v. second entry).| condition |condition 
རྐྱེན	The concomitant circumstances and influences in a causal process.
འདུས-བྱས-ཀྱི-ཆོས	 Conditioned phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-415, include the following: the world system of desire, the world system of form, the world system of formlessness, and likewise, the five psycho-physical aggregates, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions, and similarly, all those [aforementioned] attributes extending from the four applications of mindfulness, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).| Conditioned phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-415, include the following: the world system of desire, the world system of form, the world system of formlessness, and likewise, the five psycho-physical aggregates, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions, and similarly, all those [aforementioned] attributes extending from the four applications of mindfulness, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). |Conditioned phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-415, include the following: the world system of desire, the world system of form, the world system of formlessness, and likewise, the five psycho-physical aggregates, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless meditative absorptions, and similarly, all those [aforementioned] attributes extending from the four applications of mindfulness, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
འདུས-བྱས-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Seventh of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Seventh of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Seventh of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
སྡོམ-པ-ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག-པ	 Refers to unconventional practices of a tantric yogin.|Refers to unconventional practices of a tantric yogin. 
མི-ཚངས-པར-སྤྱོད-པ	 This term is the opposite of brahmacarya, ‘pure conduct’ or ‘holy life,’ which denotes the chaste life of those who have renounced the world. The term abrahmacarya therefore refers to sexual conduct, which is regarded as a root downfall for monastics on the śrāvaka path.|This term is the opposite of brahmacarya, ‘pure conduct’ or ‘holy life,’ which denotes the chaste life of those who have renounced the world. The term abrahmacarya therefore refers to sexual conduct, which is regarded as a root downfall for monastics on the śrāvaka path. 
སྤྱོད-པའི-བློ-གྲོས	 Bodhisattva of the west.| Bodhisattva of the west. |Bodhisattva of the west. 
སྤྱོད-པ-དང-ལྡན-པ	 Name of sixty-ninth meditative stability.|Name of sixty-ninth meditative stability. 
རིག-པ-དང-ཞབས-སུ-ལྡན-པ	 A common description of buddhas. According to some explanations, “wisdom” refers to awakening, and “conduct” to the three trainings ({bslab pa gsum}) by means of which a buddha attains that awakening; according to others, “wisdom” refers to right view, and “conduct” to the other seven elements of the eightfold path.| A common description of buddhas. According to some explanations, “wisdom” refers to awakening, and “conduct” to the three trainings ({bslab pa gsum}) by means of which a buddha attains that awakening; according to others, “wisdom” refers to right view, and “conduct” to the other seven elements of the eightfold path. |A common description of buddhas. According to some explanations, “wisdom” refers to awakening, and “conduct” to the three trainings ({bslab pa gsum}) by means of which a buddha attains that awakening; according to others, “wisdom” refers to right view, and “conduct” to the other seven elements of the eightfold path. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-སྤྱོད-པའི-ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས	 The forms of discipline associated with body and speech, as opposed to mind.| The forms of discipline associated with body and speech, as opposed to mind. |The forms of discipline associated with body and speech, as opposed to mind. 
ཡོན-ཏན-པདྨ-རྣམ-པར-གྲགས-སྤྱོད-སེང-གེའི-སྒྲ-སྒྲོགས	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
སྐྱེས-ནས-མ-ནིང	 Someone born with both male and female sexual organs. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order.|Someone born with both male and female sexual organs. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order. 
རྣམ-ཤེས	See “aggregate.”
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ	 The fifth of the five aggregates; also counted as the sixth of the six elements. In most Abhidharma accounts it comprises the six sensory consciousnesses, but in Yogācāra theory two more kinds of consciousness, afflicted (kliṣṭamanas) and storehouse (ālayavijñāna), are added. The term “consciousness” in this sūtra should not be assumed to conform fully to these classic categorizations.|Third of the twelve links of dependent origination. Consciousness is defined as “an awareness which is knowing and luminous.” Not being physical, it lacks resistance to obstruction. It has neither shape nor color, and it can be experienced but not externally perceived as an object. A distinction is made between the mundane consciousness of sentient beings, and the pristine cognition of the buddhas. In the context‌ of the present discourse, the former includes six aspects of consciousness, namely, visual consciousness, auditory consciousness, olfactory consciousness, tactile consciousness, and mental consciousness, the last of which objectively refers to mental phenomena. 
ལྕེའི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཁམས	 Twelfth of the eighteen sensory elements.\ngustatory consciousness| Twelfth of the eighteen sensory elements.\ngustatory consciousness |Twelfth of the eighteen sensory elements.\ngustatory consciousness 
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ-ལ-གནས-པ-བདུན	 This refers to the seven categories of living beings, as enumerated in the Abhi­dharma­kośa, III, v. 5-6a. The seven abodes of consciousness consist of beings who differ physically and intellectually; beings who differ physically but are similar intellectually; beings similar physically but who differ intellectually; beings similar physically and intellectually; and three types of immaterial beings (nānātvakāya­saṃjñāś ca nānākāyaika­saṃjñinaḥ / viparyayāc caikakāya­saṃjñāś cārūpiṇas trayaḥ // vijñāna­sthitayaḥ sapta…). According to Vasubandhu the first category consists of men, the six types of gods of the desire-realm, and the gods of the first realm of contemplation (brahma­vihāra) except those fallen from higher realms (prathamābhinivṛta); the second category consists of those fallen (prathamābhiniṛvṛta) gods who have different bodies but whose intellects are single-mindedly aware of the idea of being created by Brahmā; the third category consists of the gods of the second realm of contemplation—the abhāsvara (clear-light) gods, the parīṭṭābha (radiant) gods, and the apramāṇābha (immeasurably luminous) gods—who have similar luminous bodies but differ in their thoughts, which are bent on the experiences of pleasure and numbness; the fourth category consists of the śubhakṛtsna (pure-wholeness) gods, whose intellects are united in concentration on bliss; the fifth category consists of the immaterial beings who reside in the realm of infinite space; the sixth category consists of the immaterial beings who reside in the realm of infinite consciousness; and the seventh category consists of the immaterial beings who reside in the realm of nothingness. (See also Mvy, Nos. 2289-2295.)|This refers to the seven categories of living beings, as enumerated in the Abhi­dharma­kośa, III, v. 5-6a. The seven abodes of consciousness consist of beings who differ physically and intellectually; beings who differ physically but are similar intellectually; beings similar physically but who differ intellectually; beings similar physically and intellectually; and three types of immaterial beings (nānātvakāya­saṃjñāś ca nānākāyaika­saṃjñinaḥ / viparyayāc caikakāya­saṃjñāś cārūpiṇas trayaḥ // vijñāna­sthitayaḥ sapta…). According to Vasubandhu the first category consists of men, the six types of gods of the desire-realm, and the gods of the first realm of contemplation (brahma­vihāra) except those fallen from higher realms (prathamābhinivṛta); the second category consists of those fallen (prathamābhiniṛvṛta) gods who have different bodies but whose intellects are single-mindedly aware of the idea of being created by Brahmā; the third category consists of the gods of the second realm of contemplation—the abhāsvara (clear-light) gods, the parīṭṭābha (radiant) gods, and the apramāṇābha (immeasurably luminous) gods—who have similar luminous bodies but differ in their thoughts, which are bent on the experiences of pleasure and numbness; the fourth category consists of the śubhakṛtsna (pure-wholeness) gods, whose intellects are united in concentration on bliss; the fifth category consists of the immaterial beings who reside in the realm of infinite space; the sixth category consists of the immaterial beings who reside in the realm of infinite consciousness; and the seventh category consists of the immaterial beings who reside in the realm of nothingness. (See also Mvy, Nos. 2289-2295.) 
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-གནས-བདུན	 Seven categories that describe living beings in the higher realms, from humans up to the formless realm: 1) those different in body and different in perception; 2) those different in body and equal in perception; 3) those equal in body but different in perception; 4) those equal in body and equal in perception; 5) those reborn in the sphere of boundless space; 6) those reborn in the sphere of boundless consciousness; and 7) those reborn in the sphere of nothingness.|Seven categories that describe living beings in the higher realms, from humans up to the formless realm: 1) those different in body and different in perception; 2) those different in body and equal in perception; 3) those equal in body but different in perception; 4) those equal in body and equal in perception; 5) those reborn in the sphere of boundless space; 6) those reborn in the sphere of boundless consciousness; and 7) those reborn in the sphere of nothingness. 
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཟས	 Fourth of the four nourishments.|Fourth of the four nourishments. 
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཁམས	 The consciousness as an element or constituent of a sentient being.| The consciousness as an element or constituent of a sentient being. |The consciousness as an element or constituent of a sentient being. 
རྣ-བའི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཁམས	 Sixth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Sixth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Sixth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
སྣའི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེ-སྤའི-ཁམས	 Ninth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Ninth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Ninth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
མིག-གི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཁམས	 Third of the eighteen sensory elements.| Third of the eighteen sensory elements. |Third of the eighteen sensory elements. 
ཡིད-ཀྱི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཁམས	 Eighteenth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Eighteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Eighteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
ལུས-ཀྱི-རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཁམས	 Fifteenth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Fifteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Fifteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
རྣམ-ཤེས-མཐའ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Second of the four formless absorptions.|Second of the four formless absorptions. 
རབ-ཏུ-གནས-པ	Name of the fifty-fourth meditative stability.
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-གྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ-ལྟར-རབ-ཏུ-གནས-པ	 Name of the twelfth meditative stability.| Name of the twelfth meditative stability. |Name of the twelfth meditative stability. 
མཐུན-པར-གྱུར-པ	A gathering of all the monks present within a monastery’s boundaries for an official function (such as an ordination ceremony); with consent from any absentee monks. Also rendered here as “in concord.”\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-881.\nin concord
རྡོ-རྗེ-ཀུན-ཏུ-འཛིན-པ	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.|A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
རེག-པ	 Sixth of the twelve links of dependent origination.|Sixth of the twelve links of dependent origination. 
རེག-པའི-ཟས	 Second of the four nourishments.| Second of the four nourishments. |Second of the four nourishments. 
ཟག-པ-དང-བཅས-པའི-ཆོས	 Contaminated phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-413, include the following: the five psycho-physical aggregates which are encompassed in the three world systems, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, and the four formless meditative absorptions.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).|Contaminated phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-413, include the following: the five psycho-physical aggregates which are encompassed in the three world systems, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, and the four formless meditative absorptions.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
ཟག-པ-དང-བཅས-པ	 The phenomena of saṃsāra. Contaminated phenomena are those influenced by the defilements (kleśa, {nyon mongs}) and karma. Thus, e.g., even virtues that are under the influence of defilements like ignorance are categorized as contaminated in this way.|The phenomena of saṃsāra. Contaminated phenomena are those influenced by the defilements (kleśa, {nyon mongs}) and karma. Thus, e.g., even virtues that are under the influence of defilements like ignorance are categorized as contaminated in this way. 
རུས-གོང-གི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Eighth of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Eighth of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-འཐོར-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Seventh of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Seventh of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-རྣགས-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Fourth of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Fourth of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-བམ-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 First of the nine contemplations of impurity.|First of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-དམར-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Third of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Third of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-ཚིག-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Ninth of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Ninth of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-ཟོས-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Sixth of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Sixth of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-སྔོས-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Fifth of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Fifth of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
རྣམ-པར-འབུས-གཞིགས-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Second of the nine contemplations of impurity.|Second of the nine contemplations of impurity. 
གླེང-གཞིའི-སྡེ	 Sixth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.|Sixth of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
འདོམས-ཀྱི-སྦ-བ-སྦུབས-སུ-ནུབ-པ	Tenth of the thirty-two major marks.
མུ-སྟེགས-ཅན-ཞུགས-པ	 A person, who though once a Buddhist later converts, barred from joining the renunciate order.|A person, who though once a Buddhist later converts, barred from joining the renunciate order. 
སེན-མོ-ཟངས-ཀྱི-མདོག-ལྟ-བུ-དང-ལྡན-པ	First of the eighty minor marks.
སྤུག	 White coral is fossilized coral. It appears in one version of the list of seven jewels or treasures. Tibetan tradition describes it as being formed from ice over a long period of time. It is coral that has undergone millions of years of underwater pressure. It can also refer to tridacna (Tridacnidae) shell, which is also presently referred to by the name musaragalva. Attempts to identify musalagalva have included sapphire, cat’s eye, red coral, conch, and amber. | White coral is fossilized coral. It appears in one version of the list of seven precious materials. The Tibetan tradition describes it as being formed from ice over a long period of time. It is coral that has undergone transformation under millions of years of underwater pressure. It can also refer to tridacna (Tridacnidae) shell, which is also presently referred to by the name musaragalva. Attempts to identify musalagalva have included sapphire, cat’s eye, red coral, conch, and amber.| White coral is fossilized coral. It appears in one version of the list of seven precious materials. The Tibetan tradition describes it as being formed from ice over a long period of time. It is coral that has undergone transformation under millions of years of underwater pressure. It can also refer to tridacna (Tridacnidae) shell, which is also presently referred to by the name musaragalva. Attempts to identify musalagalva have included sapphire, cat’s eye, red coral, conch, and amber. |White coral is fossilized coral. It appears in one version of the list of seven jewels or treasures. Tibetan tradition describes it as being formed from ice over a long period of time. It is coral that has undergone millions of years of underwater pressure. It can also refer to tridacna (Tridacnidae) shell, which is also presently referred to by the name musaragalva. Attempts to identify musalagalva have included sapphire, cat’s eye, red coral, conch, and amber. 
མན-དཱ-ར-བ	 A heavenly tree. | Erythrina indica or Erythrina variegate. Mandarava, flame tree, tiger’s claw. In the summer it is covered in large crimson flowers, which are believed to also grow in Indra’s paradise. The coral tree is the most widespread species of Erythrina or māndārava, taller than the others, and all are collectively known as coral trees. | Erythrina variegate.| Erythrina variegate. | Heavenly flowers said to be very bright and aromatic, which gladden the heart of those who see them. |Erythrina indica or Erythrina variegate. Mandarava, flame tree, tiger’s claw. In the summer it is covered in large crimson flowers, which are believed to also grow in Indra’s paradise. The coral tree is the most widespread species of Erythrina or māndārava, taller than the others, and all are collectively known as coral trees. 
ཡང-དག-པར-སྤོང-བ	 Relinquishing negative acts in the present and the future and enhancing positive acts in the present and the future. | Relinquishing negative acts in the present and the future, and enhancing positive acts in the present and the future.| See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-160 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-960. | There are four kinds: the intention to not do bad actions that have not been done, to give up bad actions that are being done, to do good actions that have not been done, and to increase the good actions that are being done. Exertion is in accordance with the meaning in Buddhist Sanskrit. The Tibetan is translated as “abandonment” as in classical Sanskrit, which does not fit the context. |There are four kinds: the intention to not do bad actions that have not been done, to give up bad actions that are being done, to do good actions that have not been done, and to increase the good actions that are being done. Exertion is in accordance with the meaning in Buddhist Sanskrit. The Tibetan is translated as “abandonment” as in classical Sanskrit, which does not fit the context. 
དགའ-བ-ཡང-དག	 Fourth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndelight|Fourth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndelight 
དགའ-བ-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Fourth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndelight|Fourth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndelight 
བཏང-སྙོམས-ཡང-དག	 Seventh of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nequanimity| Seventh of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nequanimity |Seventh of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nequanimity 
བཏང-སྙོམས-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Seventh of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nequanimity| Seventh of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nequanimity |Seventh of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nequanimity 
དྲན-པ-ཡང-དག	 First of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nrecollection| First of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nrecollection |First of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nrecollection 
དྲན-པ-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 First of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nrecollection| First of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nrecollection |First of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nrecollection 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Third of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nperseverance|Third of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nperseverance 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཡང-དག	 Third of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nperseverance|Third of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nperseverance 
ཡང-དག-པའི-ངག	 Third of the noble eightfold path.| Third of the noble eightfold path. |Third of the noble eightfold path. 
ཡང-དག-པའི-ལྟ-བ	 First of the noble eightfold path.| First of the noble eightfold path. |First of the noble eightfold path. 
ཡང-དག-པའི-རྩོལ-བ	 Sixth of the noble eightfold path.|Sixth of the noble eightfold path. 
ཡང-དག-པའི-རྟོག-པ	 Second of the noble eightfold path. Also translated as "correct thought.”\ncorrect thought| Second of the noble eightfold path. Also translated as "correct thought.”\ncorrect thought |Second of the noble eightfold path. Also translated as "correct thought.”\ncorrect thought 
ཡང-དག-པའི-དྲན-པ	 Seventh of the noble eightfold path.| Seventh of the noble eightfold path. |Seventh of the noble eightfold path. 
ཡང-དག-པའི-འཚོ-བ	 Fifth of the noble eightfold path.|Fifth of the noble eightfold path. 
ཆོས-རབ-ཏུ-རྣམ-པར-འབྱེད-པ	 Second of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndoctrinal analysis|Second of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndoctrinal analysis 
ཆོས-རབ-ཏུ-རྣམ-པར-འབྱེད-པ-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Second of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndoctrinal analysis|Second of the seven branches of enlightenment.\ndoctrinal analysis 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-ཡང-དག	 Sixth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmeditative stability,| Sixth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmeditative stability, |Sixth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmeditative stability, 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Sixth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmeditative stability,| Sixth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmeditative stability, |Sixth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmeditative stability, 
ཡང-དག-པའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 Eighth of the noble eightfold path.| Eighth of the noble eightfold path. |Eighth of the noble eightfold path. 
ཡང-དག-པར-སྤོང-བ-བཞི	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-160 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-960. | These are effort not to initiate sins not yet arisen; effort to eliminate sins already arisen; effort to initiate virtues not yet arisen; and effort to consolidate, increase, and not deteriorate virtues already arisen. For my use of “effort” (samyak­pradhāna) instead of lit. “abandonment” (samyak­prahāna) see Dayal, p. 102 ff. These four form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment.|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-160 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-960. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྦྱངས-པ-ཡང-དག	 Fifth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmental and physical refinement|Fifth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmental and physical refinement 
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྦྱངས-པ-ཡང-དག-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 Fifth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmental and physical refinement|Fifth of the seven branches of enlightenment.\nmental and physical refinement 
རླུང-གི-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར	 The ancient cosmology maintained that the cosmos was encircled by an atmosphere of fierce winds of impenetrable intensity (see Lamotte, p. 255, n. 15).|The ancient cosmology maintained that the cosmos was encircled by an atmosphere of fierce winds of impenetrable intensity (see Lamotte, p. 255, n. 15). 
རུ-རྟ	 Negi identifies the Tibetan ru rta as a translation of the Sanskrit kuṣṭhaṃ, Saussurea costus (McHugh, 2008, p 233).| Negi identifies the Tibetan ru rta as a translation of the Sanskrit kuṣṭhaṃ, Saussurea costus (McHugh, 2008, p 233). |Saussurea costus. 
རས-གོས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ལུད-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
བདག-ལྷན-ཅིག-རྩོད-པ-འགྱེད-པར-འགྱུར	 counter and undermine the self| counter and undermine the self |counter and undermine the self 
བ-ལཱ	Sida cordifolia.
བཱ-ལ	Sida cordifolia.
སྤོབས-པ	 Also translated here as “courage.” See also “unhindered discernment of inspiration.”| The Tibetan word literally means “confidence” or “courage” but it refers to confident speech, to being perfectly eloquent, especially in expressing the Dharma. | The Tibetan word literally means “confidence” or “courage” but it refers to confident speech, to being perfectly eloquent. |Also translated here as “inspiration.” 
བརྣབ-སེམས	Eighth of ten non-virtuous actions; first of the four knots.
ཀ-པི-ཀཙྪ	Mucuna pruriens.
ཏ-ག-ར	 Tabernaemontana coronaria.| Tabernaemontana coronaria. |Tabernaemontana coronaria. 
སྲེད-པ	 Eighth of the twelve links of dependent origination; fourth of the four torrents.|Eighth of the twelve links of dependent origination; fourth of the four torrents. 
ཚུལ-ཤིང	A bamboo stick distributed to monks and used as a voting ballot or meal ticket. Also used by non-Buddhist orders as an identity certificate.
དབང-པོའི-ཏོག	 A yakṣa lord. | Name of the twenty-fifth meditative stability.|Name of the twenty-fifth meditative stability. 
ངེས-པའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན-ཏོག	 Name of the ninth meditative stability.|Name of the ninth meditative stability. 
ཟླ-བའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན-ཏོག	 Name of fifth meditative stability.| Name of fifth meditative stability. |Name of fifth meditative stability. 
གཏའ-གམ	A person whose growth is stunted and exhibits general sluggishness due to hypothyroidism.
རྟེན-འཕྱེ	One who is said to have a physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
སྤྱི-གཙུག	This is listed on http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2379 as the last (33rd) of the major marks.\nprotuberance on the crown
དབུ-གཙུག-ཏོར-དང-ལྡན-པ	This is listed on http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2379 as the last (33rd) of the major marks.\nprotuberance on the crown
སྤྱི-གཙུག-བལྟར-མི-མངོན-པ	 Seventy-first of the eighty minor marks.|Seventy-first of the eighty minor marks. 
མན-ཤེལ	A Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit term.
ཀཾ-ཀཱ-ལཾ-ཀོ	Piper cubeba florence.
ལམ-ཕྲན-བསྟན	 Śrāvaka arhat, one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”).|Śrāvaka arhat, one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”). 
རྣམ-པར-འཇིག-པ	 (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1963).|(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1963). 
སྒོམ-ལམ	 Fourth of the five paths, preceded by the paths of provisions, connection and insight, and followed by the path of no-more-learning.|Fourth of the five paths, preceded by the paths of provisions, connection and insight, and followed by the path of no-more-learning. 
ཟི-ར	Cuminum cyminum.
སྐུལ-བྱེད	 A pupil of the Buddha who had miraculous powers. Also said to be the younger brother of Śāriputra. There were at least three pupils of the Buddha who had the name Cunda, but in this sūtra it is Mahācunda, “Great Cunda.” Not to be confused with the layperson Cunda, who gave the Buddha his last meal.|A pupil of the Buddha who had miraculous powers. Also said to be the younger brother of Śāriputra. There were at least three pupils of the Buddha who had the name Cunda, but in this sūtra it is Mahācunda, “Great Cunda.” Not to be confused with the layperson Cunda, who gave the Buddha his last meal. 
འགྲམ	A cupola covering each of the four gates of the maṇḍala.
སེང-ལྡེང	 Acacia catechu. | Acacia catechu; cutch tree, kutch tree.| Acacia catechu; cutch tree, kutch tree. |Acacia catechu. 
སྤེན-པ	 A rishi of ancient India, the son of Rishi Bhṛgu, known for having become a youth again after he had reached an old age.|A rishi of ancient India, the son of Rishi Bhṛgu, known for having become a youth again after he had reached an old age. 
འཁོར-བ	 A state of involuntary existence conditioned by afflicted mental states and the imprint of past actions, characterised by suffering in a cycle of life, death, and rebirth. On its reversal, the contrasting state of nirvāṇa is attained, free from suffering and the processes of rebirth.| An unending series of unenlightened existences. | The Sanskrit means “continuation” and the Tibetan “circling.” An unending series of unenlightened existences. | The conditioned realm of cyclic existence in which beings are confined to perpetual suffering and unsatisfactoriness. | The continuum of repeated birth and death. | The cycle of birth and death; that is, life as experienced by living beings under the influence of ignorance, not any sort of objective world external to the persons experiencing it. | This term is natural, instead of either “transmigration” or “the round,” because it conveys well the sense of the transformations of living things; it also connotes to all modern readers the whole span and scope of the world of living things. Sometimes “world” suffices, sometimes “evolution” is intriguing. |A state of involuntary existence conditioned by afflicted mental states and the imprint of past actions, characterised by suffering in a cycle of life, death, and rebirth. On its reversal, the contrasting state of nirvāṇa is attained, free from suffering and the processes of rebirth. 
རིམས-ཉིན-རེ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མཁའ-འགྲོ-མ	 A class of female deities; a class of female nonhuman beings. | In the higher tantras they are portrayed as keepers of tantric teachings or embodiments of enlightenment. Otherwise in Indian culture, however, they are possibly dangerous female spirits haunting crossroads and charnel grounds, and are in Kāli’s retinue.| In the higher tantras they are portrayed as keepers of tantric teachings or embodiments of enlightenment. Otherwise in Indian culture, however, they are possibly dangerous female spirits haunting crossroads and charnel grounds, and are in Kāli’s retinue. | Like yoginīs, these are semi-divine female beings who have long haunted the margins of South Asian culture. They are frequently propitiated in order to acquire mundane and transcendent spiritual accomplishment. |Like yoginīs, these are semi-divine female beings who have long haunted the margins of South Asian culture. They are frequently propitiated in order to acquire mundane and transcendent spiritual accomplishment. 
ཅང-ཏེའུ	 A small two-headed drum played with one hand.|A small two-headed drum played with one hand. 
དཱ-ན-ཤཱི-ལ	 Translator of the Sukhāvatī­vyūha­sūtra.|Translator of the Sukhāvatī­vyūha­sūtra. 
དབྱུག-གུ	 A staff; punishment; the duration of a single breath (from the moment of inhalation until the moment of the next inhalation).|A staff; punishment; the duration of a single breath (from the moment of inhalation until the moment of the next inhalation). 
ཤིང-རྟ-བཅུ-པའི-བུ	 “The son of Daśaratha” is actually Rāma. At the point in the Kāraṇḍavyūha where Nārāyaṇa, really Viṣṇu, rescues the kṣatriyas, he is inexplicably called by this name, which may reference a Rāma story. Rāma came to be viewed as one of the ten incarnations of Nārāyaṇa.|“The son of Daśaratha” is actually Rāma. At the point in the Kāraṇḍavyūha where Nārāyaṇa, really Viṣṇu, rescues the kṣatriyas, he is inexplicably called by this name, which may reference a Rāma story. Rāma came to be viewed as one of the ten incarnations of Nārāyaṇa. 
ཁརྫུ-ར	Phoenix sylvestre Roxb.
རིགས-ཀྱི-བུ-མོ	 A term of endearment, used by a teacher when adressing a female follower of the bodhisattva path. | woman of a good family|A term of endearment, used by a teacher when adressing a female follower of the bodhisattva path. 
ཡ-ཟ-མ-ཟུག	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
ངེས-པར-སེམས-པ	Analytic concentration that gains insight into the nature of reality, synonymous with “transcendental analysis,” vipaśyana (q.v.).
བསྔོ-བ	 The establishment of the correct motivation at the beginning of any practice or endeavor and the altruistic dedication at the end are regarded as highly significant. The most popular objects of the dedication are the flourishing of the sacred teachings of Buddhism throughout the universe and the attainment of full enlightenment by all sentient beings. | Transformation; in the context of a sādhana, this is the dedication of merit.|Transformation; in the context of a sādhana, this is the dedication of merit. 
ཡོངས-སུ-བསྔོ-བ	 The establishment of the correct motivation at the beginning of any practice or endeavor and the altruistic dedication at the end are regarded as highly significant. The most popular objects of the dedication are the flourishing of the sacred teachings of Buddhism throughout the universe and the attainment of full enlightenment by all sentient beings.|This refers to the bodhisattva’s constant mindfulness of the fact that all his actions of whatever form contribute to his purpose of attaining enlightenment for the sake of himself and others, i.e., his conscious deferral of the merit accruing from any virtuous action as he eschews immediate reward in favor of ultimate enlightenment for himself and all living beings. 
སྤྱན-མཐོན-ཏིང-ལྟ-བུ	Twenty-eighth of the thirty-two major marks.
རི-དགས-ཀྱི-ནགས	 The forest, located outside of Varanasi, where the Buddha first taught the Dharma.| The forest, located outside of Varanasi, where the Buddha first taught the Dharma. | The forest, located outside of Vārāṇasī, where the Buddha first taught the Dharma. |The forest, located outside of Vārāṇasī, where the Buddha first taught the Dharma. 
དྲང-སྲོང-རི-དྭགས-ཀྱི-ནགས	 The site near Vārāṇasī where the Buddha first turned the wheel of Dharma and former abode of the Buddha Kāśyapa.\nDeer Park of Ṛṣipatana| The site near Vārāṇasī where the Buddha first turned the wheel of Dharma and former abode of the Buddha Kāśyapa.\nDeer Park of Ṛṣipatana |The site near Vārāṇasī where the Buddha first turned the wheel of Dharma and former abode of the Buddha Kāśyapa.\nDeer Park of Ṛṣipatana 
ཕམ-པ	The most severe of the five types of transgressions a monk can incur. It cannot be expunged and results in the monk’s defrocking, unless the saṅgha sees fit to allow him to engage in rehabilitory training.
ཟག-པ	 A term of Jain origin. It refers to uncontrolled thoughts, being distracted by objects, and hence its meaning of “leaks.”| Mental afflictions can be called outflows since they “flow out,” i.e., they are caused by certain dharmas (said to be “with outflows”). |A term of Jain origin, meaning “inflows.” It refers to uncontrolled thoughts as a result of being influenced by sensory objects and thus being sullied or defiled. It is also defined as “outflows,” hence the Tibetan {zag pa} (“leaks”) as the mind is “flowing out” toward the sensory objects. 
ངེས-འབྱུང	This term is also translated as ‘renunciation’ and denotes the practitioner’s mind turning away from the bonds of saṃsāra and towards liberation.
འཇིག-རྟེན-ཀྱི-ཁམས-དུ-མ-པ-ཁམས-སྣ-ཚོགས-པ-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Fourth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know multiple world systems and diverse sensory elements| Fourth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know multiple world systems and diverse sensory elements |Fourth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know multiple world systems and diverse sensory elements 
སེམས-ཅན-གཞན-དག-དང-གང-ཟག-གཞན-རྣམས-ཀྱི-མོས-པ-སྣ-ཚོགས-ཉིད-དང-མོས-པ-དུ-མ-ཉིད-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Fifth or sixth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know the worlds endowed with a diversity of inclinations and a multiplicity of inclinations|Fifth or sixth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know the worlds endowed with a diversity of inclinations and a multiplicity of inclinations 
ཐམས-ཅད-དུ-འགྲོ-བའི-ལམ-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Seventh of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know the paths that lead everywhere|Seventh of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know the paths that lead everywhere 
སེམས-ཅན-གཞན-དག-དང-གང-ཟག-གཞན-རྣམས-ཀྱི-དབང-པོ-མཆོག-དང-མཆོག-མ-ཡིན-པ-ཉིད-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Sixth or fifth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know whether the acumen of other sentient beings, and other individuals, is supreme or not|Sixth or fifth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know whether the acumen of other sentient beings, and other individuals, is supreme or not 
གནས-མ-ཡིན-པ-ལ-ཡང-གནས-མ-ཡིན-པར-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Second of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\nthings which are impossible are indeed impossible|Second of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\nthings which are impossible are indeed impossible 
གནས-ལ-ཡང-གནས-སུ-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 First of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that things which are possible are indeed possible|First of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that things which are possible are indeed possible 
ཟག-པ-ཟད-པ-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Tenth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased| Tenth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased |Tenth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased 
ཟག-པ-ཟད-པ	 Tenth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased| Tenth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased |Tenth of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know that through their extrasensory powers they have actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased 
འདས-པ-དང-མ-འོངས-པ-དང-ད-ལྟར-བྱུང-བའི-ལས-རྣམས-དང-ལས-ཡང-དག-པར-ལེན-པ-རྣམས-ཀྱི-རྣམ-པར-སྨིན-པ-གནས-ཀྱི-སྒོ-དང-རྒྱུའི-སྒོ-ནས-ཡང-དག-པ-ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-དུ-རབ-ཏུ-ཤེས-པ	 Third of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know through contingencies and causes the maturation of the past, future, and present actions [of sentient beings], and of those who undertake such actions|Third of the ten powers of the tathāgatas.\ndefinitively know through contingencies and causes the maturation of the past, future, and present actions [of sentient beings], and of those who undertake such actions 
ངེས-དོན	This refers to those teachings of the Buddha that are in terms of ultimate reality; it is opposed to those teachings given in terms of relative reality, termed “interpretable meaning,” because they require further interpretation before being relied on to indicate the ultimate. Hence definitive meaning relates to voidness, etc., and no statement concerning the relative world, even by the Buddha, can be taken as definitive. This is especially important in the context of the Mādhyamika doctrine, hence in the context of Vimalakīrti’s teachings, because he is constantly correcting the disciples and bodhisattvas who accept interpretable expressions of the Tathāgata as if they were definitive, thereby attaching themselves to them and adopting a one-sided approach.
པགས-པ-སྲབ-ཅིང-འཇམ-ལ-སྣུམ-པ	Thirteenth of the thirty-two major marks.
འཕྲུལ-དགའ	 Fifth god realm of desire, meaning “delighting in emanation.”| Fifth god realm of desire, meaning “delighting in emanation.” | The fifth (counting from the lowest) of the six paradises in the desire realm. | The second highest of the six heavens of the desire realm. |The fifth (second highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm. 
གཏི-མུག	One of the three poisons ({dug gsum}) along with hatred and desire which perpetuate the sufferings of cyclic existence. Delusion is the obfuscating mental state which obstructs an individual from generating knowledge or insight, and it is said to be characteristic of the animal world in general.
གཏི-མུག-རྡོ-རྗེ-མ	 Consort of White Acala.|Consort of White Acala. 
བདུད	 (1) A deva, sometimes said to be the principal deity in Paranirmitavaśavartin, the highest paradise in the desire realm; also one of the names of the god of desire, Kāma in the Vedic tradition. He is portrayed as attempting to prevent the Buddha’s enlightenment. In early soteriological religions, the principal deity in saṃsāra, such as Indra, would attempt to prevent anyone’s realization that would lead to such a liberation.\n(2) The devas ruled over by Māra, and assisting his attempts to prevent the Buddha’s enlightenment; they do not wish any being to escape from saṃsāra. More generally, they are symbolic of the defects within a person that prevent enlightenment. These four personifications are: Devaputra-māra ({lha'i bu'i bdud}), the Divine Māra, which is the distraction of pleasures; Mṛtyumāra ({'chi bdag gi bdud}), the Māra of Death; Skandhamāra ({phung po'i bdud}), the Māra of the Aggregates, which is the body; and Kleśamāra ({nyon mongs pa'i bdud}), the Māra of the Afflictions. | A demonic being opposed to the spread of the Dharma and the happiness of beings. | An obstacle maker; a personification of evil. | Buddhist literature speaks of four kinds of malign or demonic influences which may impede the course of spiritual transformation. These include the impure psycho-physical aggregates; the afflicted mental states; desires and temptations; and submission to the “Lord of death,” at which point involuntary rebirth is perpetuated in cyclic existence. Also rendered here as “Māra.” | Demon who creates obstacles to practice and enlightenment. | Literally, “Death” or “Demon.” The personification of everything that functions as a hindrance to awakening. | Originally the name of Indra’s principal enemy among the asuras. In early Buddhism he appears as a drought-causing demon and eventually his name becomes that of Māra, the principal opponent of the Buddhadharma.| Originally the name of Indra’s principal enemy among the asuras. In early Buddhism he appears as a drought-causing demon and eventually his name becomes that of Māra, the principal opponent of the Buddhadharma. | Personification of everything that functions as a hindrance to awakening. See also “demonic force.” | Said to be the principal deity in Para­nirmita­vaśa­vartin, the highest paradise in the desire realm. He is also portrayed as attempting to prevent the Buddha’s enlightenment, as in early soteriological religions, the principal deity in saṃsāra, such as Indra, would attempt to prevent anyone’s realization that would lead to such a liberation. The name Māra is also used as a generic name for the deities in his realm, and also as an impersonal term for the factors that keep beings in saṃsāra. | The deities ruled over by Māra who attempted to prevent the Buddha’s enlightenment, and who do not wish any being to escape from saṃsāra. Also, they are symbolic of the defects within a person that prevent enlightenment. These four personifications are: Devaputra-māra ({lha'i bu'i bdud}), the Divine Māra, which is the distraction of pleasures; Mṛtyumāra ({'chi bdag gi bdud}), the Māra of Death; Skandhamāra ({phung po'i bdud}), the Māra of the Aggregates, which is the body; and Kleśamāra ({nyon mongs pa'i bdud}), the Māra of the Afflictions. | The devil, or evil one, who leads the forces of the gods of the desire-world in seeking to tempt and seduce the Buddha and his disciples. But according to Vimalakīrti he is actually a bodhisattva who dwells in the inconceivable liberation and displays evil activities in order to strengthen and consolidate the high resolve of all bodhisattvas. | The personification of negativity. In the Sanskrit tradition, four Māras are usually listed: the aggregates, the afflictions, the god Māra (the god of infatuation), and death. |Buddhist literature speaks of four kinds of malign or demonic influences which may impede the course of spiritual transformation. These include the impure psycho-physical aggregates; the afflicted mental states; desires and temptations; and submission to the “Lord of death,” at which point involuntary rebirth is perpetuated in cyclic existence. Also rendered here as “Māra.” 
སྤོ-བ	A period of penance imposed by the saṅgha if a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha and confesses it straight away. During the period of demotion, the offending monk loses many privileges and is barred from participating in offical acts of the saṅgha, such as ordination ceremonies.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1173.
གཞི-ནས-སྤོ-བ	 Imposed on a monk who incurs a second similar transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his demotion.|Imposed on a monk who incurs a second similar transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his demotion. 
ཡང-གཞི-ནས-བསླང-སྟེ-སྤོ-བ	 Imposed on a monk who incurs a third transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his demotion.|Imposed on a monk who incurs a third transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha while serving his demotion. 
ཡོངས-སུ-སྤོ-བ	 A full demotion is imposed when a monk who has incurred a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha nurses for a full night his intention to conceal that lapse (Viśeṣamitra, F.135.b).\nSee also “demotion” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1173.|A full demotion is imposed when a monk who has incurred a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha nurses for a full night his intention to conceal that lapse (Viśeṣamitra, F.135.b).\nSee also “demotion” and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1173. 
སྤོ-མགུ-དབྱུང-གསུམ	 Official acts of saṅgha enacted when a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1173.| Official acts of saṅgha enacted when a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1173. |Official acts of saṅgha enacted when a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1173. 
ཟོང-རྙིང	A loanword from the Graeco-Roman denarius, meaning coin.
ཐང-ཤིང	Cedrus deodara; devadār in Hindi. A cedar tree whose inner wood is aromatic and used for incense. The Sanskrit literally means “divine tree.”
རྟེན-འབྲེལ-གྱི-ཡན-ལག	 See “twelve links of dependent origination.”|See “twelve links of dependent origination.” 
རྟེན-འབྲེལ-གྱི-ཡན-ལག-བཅུ-གཉིས	 The principle of dependent origination asserts that nothing exists independently of other factors, the reason for this being that things and events come into existence only by dependence on the aggregation of multiple causes and conditions. In general, the processes of cyclic existence, through which the external world and the sentient beings within it revolve in a continuous cycle of suffering, propelled by the propensities of past actions and their interaction with afflicted mental states, originate dependent on the sequential unfolding of twelve links, commencing from fundamental ignorance and ending with birth, aging, and death (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-155–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-156). It is only through deliberate reversal of these twelve links that one can succeed in bringing the whole cycle to an end. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2061.| The principle of dependent origination asserts that nothing exists independently of other factors, the reason for this being that things and events come into existence only by dependence on the aggregation of multiple causes and conditions. In general, the processes of cyclic existence, through which the external world and the sentient beings within it revolve in a continuous cycle of suffering, propelled by the propensities of past actions and their interaction with afflicted mental states, originate dependent on the sequential unfolding of twelve links, commencing from fundamental ignorance and ending with birth, aging, and death (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-155–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-156). It is only through deliberate reversal of these twelve links that one can succeed in bringing the whole cycle to an end. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2061. |The principle of dependent origination asserts that nothing exists independently of other factors, the reason for this being that things and events come into existence only by dependence on the aggregation of multiple causes and conditions. In general, the processes of cyclic existence, through which the external world and the sentient beings within it revolve in a continuous cycle of suffering, propelled by the propensities of past actions and their interaction with afflicted mental states, originate dependent on the sequential unfolding of twelve links, commencing from fundamental ignorance and ending with birth, aging, and death (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-155–http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-156). It is only through deliberate reversal of these twelve links that one can succeed in bringing the whole cycle to an end. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2061. 
གཞག-པ	A skill taught to brahmins and kings that may relate to finance or grammar.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-142.
བརྗོད-པ	 Also translated here as “description.”|Also translated here as “statement.” 
བཟོ-ལ-སོགས-པར-གཏོགས-པ-སུམ-ཅུ	 The thirty designated arts, contained in the sixty-four crafts, are (1) writing (lipi, {yi ge}); (2) gestures (mudrā, {lag rtsis}); (3) arithmetic (gaṇana, {grangs}); (4) astrology (saṃkhya, {rtsis chen}); (5) hairbinding (śikhābandha, {thor tshugs}); (6) deportment (padabandha, {gom stabs}); (7) elephant goading (aṅkuśagraha, {lcags kyus bsgyur thabs}); (8) swordsmanship (khaḍgika/ sarau, {ral gri'i thabs}); (9) lassoing or snaring (pāśagraha, {zhags pa gdab pa}); (10) javelin throwing (tomaragraha, {mda' bo che 'phen pa}), (11) advancing (upayāṇa, {mdun du bsnur ba}), (12) retreating (apayāna, {phyir bsnur ba}); (13) cutting (chedya, {bcad pa}); (14) breaking (bhedya, {dral ba}); (15) poisoning (dālana, {dbug pa}); (16) striking from afar (dūra­vedha, {rgyang nas 'phog pa}); (17) verbal assault (śabdavedha, {sgra grags par 'phog pa}); (18) vital assault (marmavedha, {gnad du 'phog pa}) or stealthy assault (avedanīyavedha, {mi tshor bar 'phog pa}); (19) hard assault (dṛḍha­prahāri­tā, {tshabs che bar 'phog pa}); (20) jumping (laṅghita, {mchongs pa}); (21) wrestling (sālambha, {gyad kyi 'dzin stangs}); (23) running (javita, {bang}); (24) swimming (plavita, {rkyal brgal ba}); (25) elephant riding (hastigrīvā, {glang po che'i gnyar zhon pa}); (26) horse riding (aśvapṛṣṭha, {rta la zhon pa}); (27) charioteering (ratha, {shing rta'i thabs}); (28) archery (bāṇa, {mda'} ); (29) bows (dhanuḥ, {gzhu}); and (30) trials of strength (vikrama­bala, {gyad stobs}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315.|The thirty designated arts, contained in the sixty-four crafts, are (1) writing (lipi, {yi ge}); (2) gestures (mudrā, {lag rtsis}); (3) arithmetic (gaṇana, {grangs}); (4) astrology (saṃkhya, {rtsis chen}); (5) hairbinding (śikhābandha, {thor tshugs}); (6) deportment (padabandha, {gom stabs}); (7) elephant goading (aṅkuśagraha, {lcags kyus bsgyur thabs}); (8) swordsmanship (khaḍgika/ sarau, {ral gri'i thabs}); (9) lassoing or snaring (pāśagraha, {zhags pa gdab pa}); (10) javelin throwing (tomaragraha, {mda' bo che 'phen pa}), (11) advancing (upayāṇa, {mdun du bsnur ba}), (12) retreating (apayāna, {phyir bsnur ba}); (13) cutting (chedya, {bcad pa}); (14) breaking (bhedya, {dral ba}); (15) poisoning (dālana, {dbug pa}); (16) striking from afar (dūra­vedha, {rgyang nas 'phog pa}); (17) verbal assault (śabdavedha, {sgra grags par 'phog pa}); (18) vital assault (marmavedha, {gnad du 'phog pa}) or stealthy assault (avedanīyavedha, {mi tshor bar 'phog pa}); (19) hard assault (dṛḍha­prahāri­tā, {tshabs che bar 'phog pa}); (20) jumping (laṅghita, {mchongs pa}); (21) wrestling (sālambha, {gyad kyi 'dzin stangs}); (23) running (javita, {bang}); (24) swimming (plavita, {rkyal brgal ba}); (25) elephant riding (hastigrīvā, {glang po che'i gnyar zhon pa}); (26) horse riding (aśvapṛṣṭha, {rta la zhon pa}); (27) charioteering (ratha, {shing rta'i thabs}); (28) archery (bāṇa, {mda'} ); (29) bows (dhanuḥ, {gzhu}); and (30) trials of strength (vikrama­bala, {gyad stobs}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315. 
འདོད-ཆགས	First of the five fetters associated with the lower realms.
འདོད-པའི-ཁམས	 Of the three realms of existence, the realm whose beings are tormented by desire and attachment to material substance.| Of the three realms of existence, the realm whose beings are tormented by desire and attachment to material substance. | One of the three realms of saṃsāra, characterized by a prevalence of desire. |One of the three realms of saṃsāra, characterized by a prevalence of desire. 
འདོད-པའི-ཡོན-ཏན-ལྔ	 Visibles, sound, scent, taste, and tangibles.|Visibles, sound, scent, taste, and tangibles. 
ཡང-དག-པ-ཉིད-དུ-ངེས-པ	 This generally describes one who has reached the noble path, either in disciple-vehicle or Mahāyāna practice (see Lamotte, p. 115, n. 65).|This generally describes one who has reached the noble path, either in disciple-vehicle or Mahāyāna practice (see Lamotte, p. 115, n. 65). 
ངེས-པ-ལ-ཞུགས-པ	 This is the stage attained by followers of the Hinayāna wherein they become determined for the attainment of liberation (nirvāṇa, i.e., the ultimate for them) in such a way as never to regress from their goals, and by bodhisattvas when they attain the holy path of insight. (See “five paths” entry, glossary.)|This is the stage attained by followers of the Hinayāna wherein they become determined for the attainment of liberation (nirvāṇa, i.e., the ultimate for them) in such a way as never to regress from their goals, and by bodhisattvas when they attain the holy path of insight. (See “five paths” entry, glossary.) 
ང-རྒྱལ-རྣམ-པར-འཇོམས	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
སོ-སོར-བརྟག	Also translated here as “investigate.”
ལྷ	 A being in the paradises from the base of Mount Meru upward. Also can refer to a deity in the human world, or can be used as an honorific form of address for kings and other important personages. | A being in the paradises from the base of Mount Meru upward. Also can refer to a deity in the human world. | A being in the realms above the human-inhabited world. | A general name for the deities in the desire realm, and in other contexts, specifically for a group of storm deities. In translation, the Tibetan does not differentiate the term from the more general deva.| A general name for the deities in the desire realm, and in other contexts, specifically for a group of storm deities. In translation, the Tibetan does not differentiate the term from the more general deva. | General term for all sorts of gods and deities. | Gods; a class of beings in the higher planes of existence in the desire realm, as well as in the form and formless realm. | One of the five or six classes of living beings, specifically engendered and dominated by exaltation, indulgence, and pride. The gods are said to exist in realms higher than that of the human realm within in the world system of desire (kāma­dhātu), and also in the world system of form (rūpa­dhātu). |General term for all sorts of gods and deities. 
ལྷས-བྱིན	 A cousin of Buddha Śākyamuni who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium C.E. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes. | A cousin of Śākyamuni, who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium CE. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes, but not in The White Lotus of the Good Dharma, where he is a teacher of the Buddha in a previous lifetime, and the Buddha prophesies his future buddhahood.| A cousin of Śākyamuni, who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium CE. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes, but not in The White Lotus of the Good Dharma, where he is a teacher of the Buddha in a previous lifetime, and the Buddha prophesies his future buddhahood. |A cousin of Buddha Śākyamuni who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium C.E. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes. 
ལྷ-སྦྱིན	 A cousin of Buddha Śākyamuni who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium C.E. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes.|A cousin of Buddha Śākyamuni who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium C.E. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes. 
ལྷ-བྱིན	 A cousin of Buddha Śākyamuni who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium C.E. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes.|A cousin of Buddha Śākyamuni who broke with him and established his own community. His tradition was still continuing during the first millennium C.E. He is portrayed as engendering evil schemes against the Buddha and even succeeding in wounding him. He is usually identified with wicked beings in accounts of previous lifetimes. 
ལྷའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 The name of Devadatta when he becomes a buddha in the future.|The name of Devadatta when he becomes a buddha in the future. 
ལྷའི-ཐེམ-སྐས	 The realm where Devadatta will attain buddhahood.|The realm where Devadatta will attain buddhahood. 
སྐྱེད-པའི-རིམ-པ	The first of the two stages of tantric practice focused on the visualized development of the tantric maṇḍala and its deities and the recitation of mantra.
ལྷ-དབང	 Another name for Śakra, aka Indra.|Another name for Śakra, aka Indra. 
སྡིག-པ-ཅན-གྱི-ལྟ-བ	One of seven grounds for suspension from the saṅgha community.
རབ-རིབ-མེད-པ	Name of the sixty-eighth meditative stability.
ཡི-གེ-དང-བྲལ-བ	Name of the sixty-third meditative stability.
སྒྲ-དབྱངས-གྱི-ཡི-གེ-དང-བྲལ-བ	Name of the eighty-eighth meditative stability.
པ-ལཱ-ཤ	Butea monosperma, Butea frondosa.
ནོར-དཔལ	 Name of a bodhisattva, “Wealth-Splendor.”|Name of a bodhisattva, “Wealth-Splendor.” 
གཟུངས	 A magical formula invoking a particular deity for a particular purpose; dhāraṇīs are longer than most mantras, and their application is more specialized. | A statement, or spell, meant to protect or bring about a particular result; also refers to extraordinary skills regarding retention of the teachings. | An alternative name for vidyā (knowledge) and synonymous with mantra. | An exceptional power of mental retention. According to context, this term can also designate sentences or phrases for recitation that are said to hold the essence of a teaching or meaning (rendered here as dhāraṇī), and are therefore said to hold the power to bring about a range of pragmatic and spiritual effects when uttered, written, or worn.\npower of mental retention| An exceptional power of mental retention. According to context, this term can also designate sentences or phrases for recitation that are said to hold the essence of a teaching or meaning (rendered here as dhāraṇī), and are therefore said to hold the power to bring about a range of pragmatic and spiritual effects when uttered, written, or worn.\npower of mental retention | Dhāraṇīs are long strings of syllables which sum up some meaning of Dharma. Their use allows the meaning to be retained in memory. Hence the name, which means “that which holds / retains.” | See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-126. | See “retention.” | The ability to remember all Dharma teachings that are heard. In other contexts, a dhāraṇi is a powerful recitation that is a precursor of mantras and is usually in the form of intelligible sentences or phrases that preserve or retain the essence of a teaching. There are two sets of “four retentions” in relation to this text. (A) As explained in the sūtra itself in chapter 24 http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html#UT22084-055-001-2336: the retention, respectively, of teachings on composites, on sounds, on kleśas, and on purifications. (B) As explained in the commentary to the opening of the sūtra (1.2, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html#UT22084-055-001-93 ): the recited dhāraṇī sentences and phrases themselves, the retention of the memory of the words of all teachings given, the retention of the memory of the meaning of these teachings, and the retention of the realization gained through meditation on that meaning.\ndhāraṇī | These incantations, or spells, are mnemonic formulas, possessed by advanced bodhisattvas, that contain a quintessence of their attainments, not simply magical charms—although the latter are included. | This term is used in various ways. For instance, it refers to the mental capacity of not forgetting, enabling one in particular to cultivate positive forces and to ward off negativity. It is also very commonly used as a term for mystical verses similar to mantras, the usage of which will grant a particular power. | Used in several senses, elsewhere in this text translated as “incantation mantra,” but here referring to entire canonical texts used mainly for ritual purposes, structured around an incantation mantra in Sanskrit but also detailing its uses and the story of its origin. |A statement, or spell, meant to protect or bring about a particular result; also refers to extraordinary skills regarding retention of the teachings. 
གཟུངས-སྔགས-ཀྱི-ཚིག	 words of a dhāraṇī-mantra\nwords of the dhāraṇī-mantra| words of a dhāraṇī-mantra\nwords of the dhāraṇī-mantra |words of a dhāraṇī-mantra\nwords of the dhāraṇī-mantra 
ས-འཛིན	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. | One of “the sixteen excellent men,” present at the teaching of the sūtra.| One of “the sixteen excellent men,” present at the teaching of the sūtra. |A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
ས-འཛིན-ལྷ	 "The Sustainer of the Earth," a name of Viṣṇu.| "The Sustainer of the Earth," a name of Viṣṇu. |"The Sustainer of the Earth," a name of Viṣṇu. 
ཆོས	 A term that predates Buddhism, Dharma/dharmas has a wide range of meanings and usages in Buddhist texts depending on context:\nAs Dharma , it is the teaching of Buddha Śākyamuni and other buddhas, preached by their followers, and transmitted in the form of scripture; or, alternatively, it means ultimate reality itself, the referent of the teaching and what is realized through it.\nAs dharmas , it is variously the different teachings given by Buddha Śākyamuni, other buddhas, and their followers; the trainings enjoined in those teachings; the positive qualities acquired through applying those trainings; mental phenomena in general; or phenomena in general or their characteristics. Often in Buddhist literature there is a play on the multiple interlinked senses of this term.\ndharmas | Among many of its meanings, this term can refer to: the teachings of the Buddha; positive actions that accord with those teachings; or a minimal element of existence, which bears certain features through which it may be cognized. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | See “dharma.”\nphenomenon | See “dharma.”\nthings | The second of the Three Jewels, that is, the teaching of the Buddha. | The term dharma ({chos}) conveys ten different meanings, according to Vasubandhu's Vyākhyā­yukti. In the context‌ of the present work, it may mean “sacred doctrine” (also rendered “Dharma” in this translation), the “attributes” which buddhas and bodhisattvas acquire, “phenomena” or “things” in general, and, more specifically, “mental phenomena” which are the object of the mental faculty (manas, {yid}). | The term dharma ({chos}) conveys ten different meanings, according to Vasubandhu's. See also “Dharma.” | This term has multiple interrelated meanings. In this text, the primary meanings are as follows: (1) the doctrine taught by the Buddha (Dharma); (2) the ultimate reality underlying and expressed through the Buddha’s teaching (Dharma); (3) the trainings that the Buddha’s teaching stipulates (dharmas); (4) the various awakened qualities or attainments acquired through practicing and realizing the Buddha’s teaching (dharmas); (5) qualities or aspects more generally, i.e., phenomena or phenomenal attributes (dharmas); and (6) mental objects (dharmas).\nthings |The second of the Three Jewels, that is, the teaching of the Buddha. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྒོ	 Certain teachings are called “Dharma-doors” (or “doors of the Dharma”), as they provide access to the practice of the Dharma. | See “Dharma-door.”\ndoors of the Dharma| See “Dharma-door.”\ndoors of the Dharma |Certain teachings are called “Dharma-doors” (or “doors of the Dharma”), as they provide access to the practice of the Dharma. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-མིག	 Fourth of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1119.| Fourth of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1119. | One of the “five eyes,” representing superior insights of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. The five eyes consist of five different faculties of vision: the physical eye (māṃsa­cakṣu), the divine eye (dīvya­cakṣu), the wisdom eye (prajñā­cakṣu), the Dharma-eye (dharma­cakṣu), and the Buddha-eye (buddha­cakṣu). |One of the “five eyes,” representing superior insights of the buddhas and bodhisattvas. The five eyes consist of five different faculties of vision: the physical eye (māṃsa­cakṣu), the divine eye (dīvya­cakṣu), the wisdom eye (prajñā­cakṣu), the Dharma-eye (dharma­cakṣu), and the Buddha-eye (buddha­cakṣu). 
གྲོང-པའི-ཆོས	 Euphemism for sexual intercourse.| Euphemism for sexual intercourse. |Euphemism for sexual intercourse. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-འཁོར-ལོ	 The classification of all aspects of Buddha’s teachings into twelve types: sūtra, geya, vyākaraṇa, gāthā, udāna, nidāna, avadāna, itivṛttaka, jātaka, vaipulya, adbhūtadharma, and upadeśa (see individual terms).\nRespectively, the sūtras, literally “threads,” does not mean entire texts as in the general meaning of sūtra but the prose passages within texts; the geyas are the verse versions of preceding prose passages; the vyākaraṇas are prophecies; the gāthās are stand-alone verses; the udānas are teachings not given in response to a request; the nidānas are the introductory sections; the avadānas are accounts of the previous lives of individuals who were alive at the time of the Buddha; the itivṛttakas are biographies of buddhas and bodhisattvas in the past; the jātakas are the Buddha’s accounts of his own previous lifetimes; the vaipulyas are teachings that expand upon a certain subject; the adbhūtadharmas are descriptions of miracles; and the upadeśas are explanations of terms and categories. | When a buddha gives his first teaching he “sets in motion the Wheel of Dharma;” just like a monarch with exceptional merit sets in motion a magical wheel that easily subdues all his enemies.| When a buddha gives his first teaching he “sets in motion the Wheel of Dharma;” just like a monarch with exceptional merit sets in motion a magical wheel that easily subdues all his enemies. |When a buddha gives his first teaching he “sets in motion the Wheel of Dharma;” just like a monarch with exceptional merit sets in motion a magical wheel that easily subdues all his enemies. 
ཆོས-གོས	 In common parlance, this denotes the patched, yellow upper robe worn by renunciates.| The upper robe of a Buddhist monk. |The upper robe of a Buddhist monk. 
ཆོས-གོས-གསུམ	 The upper, lower and ceremonial robes of a monk.| The upper, lower and ceremonial robes of a monk. |The upper, lower and ceremonial robes of a monk. 
དྷརྨཱ-ཀ-ར	 Butön includes the Kashmiri abbot Dharmākara in his list of ninety-three paṇḍitas invited to Tibet to assist in the translation of the Buddhist scriptures. Tāranātha dates Dharmākara to the rule of *Vanapāla, son of Dharmapāla. With Paltsek, he translated two of Kalyāṇamitra’s works on Vinaya, the Vinayapraśnakārikā (’dul ba dri ba’i tshig le’ur byas pa, Toh 4134, Degé Tengyur, vol. SU, folios 70b.3–74b.5) and theVinayapraśnaṭīkā(’dul ba dri ba rgya cher ’grel pa, Toh. no. 4135, Degé Tengyur, vol. SU, folios 74b.5–132a.2).| Butön includes the Kashmiri abbot Dharmākara in his list of ninety-three paṇḍitas invited to Tibet to assist in the translation of the Buddhist scriptures. Tāranātha dates Dharmākara to the rule of *Vanapāla, son of Dharmapāla. With Paltsek, he translated two of Kalyāṇamitra’s works on Vinaya, the Vinayapraśnakārikā (’dul ba dri ba’i tshig le’ur byas pa, Toh 4134, Degé Tengyur, vol. SU, folios 70b.3–74b.5) and theVinayapraśnaṭīkā(’dul ba dri ba rgya cher ’grel pa, Toh. no. 4135, Degé Tengyur, vol. SU, folios 74b.5–132a.2). |Butön includes the Kashmiri abbot Dharmākara in his list of ninety-three paṇḍitas invited to Tibet to assist in the translation of the Buddhist scriptures. Tāranātha dates Dharmākara to the rule of *Vanapāla, son of Dharmapāla. With Paltsek, he translated two of Kalyāṇamitra’s works on Vinaya, the Vinayapraśnakārikā (’dul ba dri ba’i tshig le’ur byas pa, Toh 4134, Degé Tengyur, vol. SU, folios 70b.3–74b.5) and theVinayapraśnaṭīkā(’dul ba dri ba rgya cher ’grel pa, Toh. no. 4135, Degé Tengyur, vol. SU, folios 74b.5–132a.2). 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ-བཞི	 The four are as follows: All compounded things are impermanent (anityāḥ sarva­saṃskārāḥ). All defiled things are suffering (duḥkhāh sarva­sāsravāḥ). All things are without self (anātmanāḥ sarva­dharmāḥ). Nirvāṇa is peace (śāntaṃ nirvāṇaṃ). Also called “the four insignia of the Dharma.”\nepitomes of the Dharma\nfour epitomes\nfour insignia of the Dharma\ninsignia of the Dharma| The four are as follows: All compounded things are impermanent (anityāḥ sarva­saṃskārāḥ). All defiled things are suffering (duḥkhāh sarva­sāsravāḥ). All things are without self (anātmanāḥ sarva­dharmāḥ). Nirvāṇa is peace (śāntaṃ nirvāṇaṃ). Also called “the four insignia of the Dharma.”\nepitomes of the Dharma\nfour epitomes\nfour insignia of the Dharma\ninsignia of the Dharma |The four are as follows: All compounded things are impermanent (anityāḥ sarva­saṃskārāḥ). All defiled things are suffering (duḥkhāh sarva­sāsravāḥ). All things are without self (anātmanāḥ sarva­dharmāḥ). Nirvāṇa is peace (śāntaṃ nirvāṇaṃ). Also called “the four insignia of the Dharma.”\nepitomes of the Dharma\nfour epitomes\nfour insignia of the Dharma\ninsignia of the Dharma 
བཀའ-རྟགས-ཀྱི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ-བཞི	 All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace.| All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace. | The four are as follows: All compounded things are impermanent (anityāḥ sarva­saṃskārāḥ). All defiled things are suffering (duḥkhāh sarva­sāsravāḥ). All things are without self (anātmanāḥ sarva­dharmāḥ). Nirvāṇa is peace (śāntaṃ nirvāṇaṃ). Also called “the four insignia of the Dharma.”\nepitomes of the Dharma\nfour epitomes\nfour insignia of the Dharma\ninsignia of the Dharma |The four are as follows: All compounded things are impermanent (anityāḥ sarva­saṃskārāḥ). All defiled things are suffering (duḥkhāh sarva­sāsravāḥ). All things are without self (anātmanāḥ sarva­dharmāḥ). Nirvāṇa is peace (śāntaṃ nirvāṇaṃ). Also called “the four insignia of the Dharma.”\nepitomes of the Dharma\nfour epitomes\nfour insignia of the Dharma\ninsignia of the Dharma 
ཆོས-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Second of the ten recollections.| Second of the ten recollections. |Second of the ten recollections. 
ཕྱིར-མི-ལྡོག-པའི-ཆོས-ཀྱི-འཁོར-ལོ	 The fact that the Dharma is not a single dogma, law, or fixed system, but instead an adaptable body of techniques available for any living being to aid in his development and liberation is emphasized by this metaphor. This wheel is said to turn by the current of energy from the needs and wishes of living beings, and its turning automatically converts negative energies (e.g., desire, hatred, and ignorance) to positive ones (e.g., detachment, love, and wisdom).| The fact that the Dharma is not a single dogma, law, or fixed system, but instead an adaptable body of techniques available for any living being to aid in his development and liberation is emphasized by this metaphor. This wheel is said to turn by the current of energy from the needs and wishes of living beings, and its turning automatically converts negative energies (e.g., desire, hatred, and ignorance) to positive ones (e.g., detachment, love, and wisdom). |The fact that the Dharma is not a single dogma, law, or fixed system, but instead an adaptable body of techniques available for any living being to aid in his development and liberation is emphasized by this metaphor. This wheel is said to turn by the current of energy from the needs and wishes of living beings, and its turning automatically converts negative energies (e.g., desire, hatred, and ignorance) to positive ones (e.g., detachment, love, and wisdom). 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	 Someone who follows his or her goal according to the teaching of the sūtras and so forth.| Someone who follows his or her goal according to the teaching of the sūtras and so forth. |Someone who follows his or her goal according to the teaching of the sūtras and so forth. 
འདུལ-བ-འདི-ལ-མི-སྐྱེ-བའི-ཆོས-ཅན	 Someone for whom there are factors that prevent giving rise to the vows (Kalyāṇamitra, F.292.a.4).\none who will not flourish in the Dharma and Vinaya| Someone for whom there are factors that prevent giving rise to the vows (Kalyāṇamitra, F.292.a.4).\none who will not flourish in the Dharma and Vinaya |Someone for whom there are factors that prevent giving rise to the vows (Kalyāṇamitra, F.292.a.4).\none who will not flourish in the Dharma and Vinaya 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-འོད-ཟེར-རབ-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པའི-སྐུ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
ཆོས-སྨྲ-བ	 In early Buddhism a section of the Saṅgha would be bhāṇakas, who, particularly before the teachings were written down and were transmitted solely orally, were the key factor in the preservation of the teachings. Various groups of bhāṇakas specialized in memorizing and reciting a certain set of sūtras or vinaya.| In early Buddhism a section of the Saṅgha would be bhāṇakas, who, particularly before the teachings were written down and were transmitted solely orally, were the key factor in the preservation of the teachings. Various groups of bhāṇakas specialized in memorizing and reciting a certain set of sūtras or vinaya. | Someone who recites the Dharma teachings, either from a text or from memory. In early Buddhism, in particular before the teachings were written down and were transmitted solely orally, a section of the saṅgha would be bhāṇakas, who were the key factor in the preservation of the teachings. Various groups of bhāṇakas specialized in memorizing and reciting a certain set of sūtras or vinaya. Even when the teachings existed in writing, a reciter of Dharma teachings was of great importance within a society that was predominantly illiterate. | Speaker or reciter of scriptures. In early Buddhism a section of the sangha would be bhāṇakas, who, particularly before the teachings were written down and were only transmitted orally, were the key factor in the preservation of the teachings. Various groups of dharmabhāṇakas specialized in memorizing and reciting a certain set of sūtras or vinaya. |Speaker or reciter of scriptures. In early Buddhism a section of the sangha would be bhāṇakas, who, particularly before the teachings were written down and were only transmitted orally, were the key factor in the preservation of the teachings. Various groups of dharmabhāṇakas specialized in memorizing and reciting a certain set of sūtras or vinaya. 
ཆོས-འཛིན	 Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | One of the four kings of the kinnaras. He is present at the teaching of the sūtra. |One of the four kings of the kinnaras. He is present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-དབྱིངས	 A synonym for emptiness or the ultimate nature of things (see i.4). This term is interpreted variously—given the many connotations of dharma / {chos}—as the sphere, element, or nature, of phenomena, reality, or truth. In this text it is used with this general, Mahāyāna sense, not to be confused with its rather different meaning in the Abhidharma as one of the twelve sense sources (āyatana) and eighteen elements (dhātu) related to mental perception. | Defined as the ultimate nature of phenomena, and also as the essence of the Dharma. Literally “the element of phenomena, or the Dharma.” This term is also used to mean “the realm of phenomena,” meaning all phenomena. | Defined in the commentary as the ultimate nature of phenomena, or the supreme among phenomena. Also defined as the essence of the Dharma. Literally “the element of phenomena, or the Dharma.” This term is also used to mean “the realm of phenomena,” meaning all phenomena. | In combination with pratītya­samutpāda (in this text {rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba chos kyi dbyings}), the term dharmadhātu can refer to a type of Buddhist relic which is said to embody the essence of the Buddhist doctrine. | The "sphere of dharmas," a synonym for the nature of things. | The element, or nature, of ultimate reality. | This compound is actually metaphorical in sense, with (at least) two interpretations possible because of ambiguities in the word dhātu. Dhātu as in the expression kāmadhātu (desire-realm), may mean “realm”; or it may mean “element,” as in the eighteen elements (see entry), where it is explained as analogous to a mineral such as copper. Thus the realm of the Dharma is the dharmakāyā, the pure source and sphere of the Dharma. And the element of the Dharma is like a mine from which the verbal Dharma, the buddha-qualities, and the wisdoms of the arhats and bodhisattvas are culled. This is metaphorical, as Vimalakīrti would remind us, because the Dharma, the ultimate, is ultimately not a particular place; it is immanent in all places, being the actuality and ultimate condition of all things and being relatively no one thing except, like voidness, the supremely beneficent of concepts.| This compound is actually metaphorical in sense, with (at least) two interpretations possible because of ambiguities in the word dhātu. Dhātu as in the expression kāmadhātu (desire-realm), may mean “realm”; or it may mean “element,” as in the eighteen elements (see entry), where it is explained as analogous to a mineral such as copper. Thus the realm of the Dharma is the dharmakāyā, the pure source and sphere of the Dharma. And the element of the Dharma is like a mine from which the verbal Dharma, the buddha-qualities, and the wisdoms of the arhats and bodhisattvas are culled. This is metaphorical, as Vimalakīrti would remind us, because the Dharma, the ultimate, is ultimately not a particular place; it is immanent in all places, being the actuality and ultimate condition of all things and being relatively no one thing except, like voidness, the supremely beneficent of concepts. | “The sphere of dharmas,” “the base of dharmas,” “the ore of dharmas”—a synonym for the nature of things. |In combination with pratītya­samutpāda (in this text {rten cing 'brel bar 'byung ba chos kyi dbyings}), the term dharmadhātu can refer to a type of Buddhist relic which is said to embody the essence of the Buddhist doctrine. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-ཁམས	 Seventeenth of the eighteen sensory elements| Seventeenth of the eighteen sensory elements | The domain of mental objects. |The domain of mental objects. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-གཎ-དཱི	 A gong, or a wooden block or beam, sounded to call the community together for a teaching or other assembly.|A gong, or a wooden block or beam, sounded to call the community together for a teaching or other assembly. 
ཆོས-སྐུ	 Dharmakāya or “body of dharma” refers to the Buddha’s realization of reality. | In distinction to the rūpakāya, or form body of a buddha, this is the eternal imperceptible realization of a buddha. In origin it was a term for the presence of the Dharma, and has come to become synonymous with the true nature.| In distinction to the rūpakāya, or form body of a buddha, this is the eternal imperceptible realization of a buddha. In origin it was a term for the presence of the Dharma, and has come to become synonymous with the true nature. |Dharmakāya or “body of dharma” refers to the Buddha’s realization of reality. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-བློ-གྲོས	 One of the eight sons of Candra­sūrya­pradīpa. Also one of the translators of the Lotus Sūtra into Chinese.|One of the eight sons of Candra­sūrya­pradīpa. Also one of the translators of the Lotus Sūtra into Chinese. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-བཤེས-གཉེན	 Ninth-century Indian author.|Ninth-century Indian author. 
ཆོས-རབ-ཏུ-སྣང-བ	 Pūrna Maitrāyaṇī­putra’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future.|Pūrna Maitrāyaṇī­putra’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future. 
ཆོས-ཉིད	 A synonym of emptiness.| The nature of the dharmas, or their state. |The nature of the dharmas, or their state. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-ནམ-མཁའ-མངོན-འཕགས-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha of the distant past.|A buddha of the distant past. 
ཁམས	 Depending on the context, may translate either: (a) Skt. mahābhūta, Tib. {'byung ba chen po}, the four “main” or “great” outer elements of earth, water, fire, air, and (when there is a fifth) space; or: (b) Skt. dhātu, Tib. khams, the “eighteen elements” introduce, in the context of the aggregates, elements, and sense-media, the same six pairs as the twelve sense-media, as elements of experience, adding a third member to each set: the element of consciousness (vijñāna), or sense. Hence the first pair gives the triad eye-element (caksur­dhātu), form-element (rūpadhātu), and eye-consciousness-element, or eye-sense-element (caksur­vijñāna­dhātu)—and so on with the other five, noting the last, mind-element (manodhātu), phenomena-element (dharma­dhātu), and mental-sense-element (mano­vijñāna­dhātu). | Eighteen collections of similar dharmas, under which all compounded and uncompounded dharmas may be included: eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind, plus their objects: visible forms, sounds, smells, flavors, touchables, and dharmas, plus the consciousnesses corresponding to each of the first six. | In different contexts four, five, or six elements may be enumerated. The four elements are earth, water, fire, and air. A fifth, space, is often added. The six elements are: earth, water, fire, air, space, and consciousness. | Often translated “element,” commonly in the context of the eighteen elements of sensory experience (the six sense faculties, their six respective objects, and the six sensory consciousnesses), although the term has a wide range of other meanings. Along with skandha and āyatana, one of the three major categories in the taxonomy of phenomena in the sūtra literature. | One way of describing experience and the world in terms of eighteen elements (eye, form, and eye consciousness; ear, sound, and ear consciousness; nose, odor, and nose consciousness; tongue, taste, and tongue consciousness; body, touch, and body consciousness; mind, mental objects, and mind consciousness). | See “eighteen sensory elements.”| See “eighteen sensory elements.” | The six sensory objects, six sensory faculties, and six consciousnesses. |One way of describing experience and the world in terms of eighteen elements (eye, form, and eye consciousness; ear, sound, and ear consciousness; nose, odor, and nose consciousness; tongue, taste, and tongue consciousness; body, touch, and body consciousness; mind, mental objects, and mind consciousness). 
འབྱུང-བ-ཆེན-པོ	 Depending on the context, may translate either: (a) Skt. mahābhūta, Tib. {'byung ba chen po}, the four “main” or “great” outer elements of earth, water, fire, air, and (when there is a fifth) space; or: (b) Skt. dhātu, Tib. khams, the “eighteen elements” introduce, in the context of the aggregates, elements, and sense-media, the same six pairs as the twelve sense-media, as elements of experience, adding a third member to each set: the element of consciousness (vijñāna), or sense. Hence the first pair gives the triad eye-element (caksur­dhātu), form-element (rūpadhātu), and eye-consciousness-element, or eye-sense-element (caksur­vijñāna­dhātu)—and so on with the other five, noting the last, mind-element (manodhātu), phenomena-element (dharma­dhātu), and mental-sense-element (mano­vijñāna­dhātu). | The four elements composing the physical world: earth water, fire, and air.| The four elements composing the physical world: earth water, fire, and air. |Depending on the context, may translate either: (a) Skt. mahābhūta, Tib. {'byung ba chen po}, the four “main” or “great” outer elements of earth, water, fire, air, and (when there is a fifth) space; or: (b) Skt. dhātu, Tib. khams, the “eighteen elements” introduce, in the context of the aggregates, elements, and sense-media, the same six pairs as the twelve sense-media, as elements of experience, adding a third member to each set: the element of consciousness (vijñāna), or sense. Hence the first pair gives the triad eye-element (caksur­dhātu), form-element (rūpadhātu), and eye-consciousness-element, or eye-sense-element (caksur­vijñāna­dhātu)—and so on with the other five, noting the last, mind-element (manodhātu), phenomena-element (dharma­dhātu), and mental-sense-element (mano­vijñāna­dhātu). 
རིང-བསྲེལ	 Funerary relics.|Funerary relics. 
ཡུལ-འཁོར-སྲུང	 Literally, “Guardian of the Region.” Name of one of the four great kings who rule over the four directions in the desire realm. | One of the four mahārājas, he is the guardian deity for the east and lord of the gandharvas. | One of the four mahārājas, he is the guardian deity for the east and traditionally lord of the gandharvas, though in this sūtra he appears to be king of the nāgas. It is also the name of a goose king that was one of the Buddha’s previous lives, and in that instance it is translated into Tibetan as {ngang skya}. | One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the east, presiding over the gandharva spirits that live there.| One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the east, presiding over the gandharva spirits that live there. |One of the four mahārājas, he is the guardian deity for the east and traditionally lord of the gandharvas, though in this sūtra he appears to be king of the nāgas. It is also the name of a goose king that was one of the Buddha’s previous lives, and in that instance it is translated into Tibetan as {ngang skya}. 
ངང-སྐྱ	 One of the four mahārājas, he is the guardian deity for the east and traditionally lord of the gandharvas, though in this sūtra he appears to be king of the nāgas. It is also the name of a goose king that was one of the Buddha’s previous lives, and in that instance it is translated into Tibetan as {ngang skya}.|One of the four mahārājas, he is the guardian deity for the east and traditionally lord of the gandharvas, though in this sūtra he appears to be king of the nāgas. It is also the name of a goose king that was one of the Buddha’s previous lives, and in that instance it is translated into Tibetan as {ngang skya}. 
མོས-པ-རྫོགས-པ	 A bodhisattva in the distant future.|A bodhisattva in the distant future. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
འཁྲུལ-འཁོར	 A diagram drawn in tantric rituals. | A magical diagram; any mechanical tool or device.| A magical diagram; any mechanical tool or device. |A diagram drawn in tantric rituals. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-ལྟ-བུའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 A very high level of samādhi obtained during the last stages of the Buddhist path.|A very high level of samādhi obtained during the last stages of the Buddhist path. 
འགྲོ-བ-ཐ-དད-པ	differentiation of the realms of sentient beings
མར-མེ-མཛད	 A previous buddha in the distant past.| A previous buddha in the distant past. | A previous buddha who gave Śākyamuni the prophecy of his buddhahood. | Name of a buddha of the past. |A previous buddha who gave Śākyamuni the prophecy of his buddhahood. 
སེན-རིངས	 “He Who Has Long Fingernails,” Koṣṭhila’s name after he joined an order of wandering ascetics to continue his studies of Lokāyata philosophy. He later joined the Buddhist order and was known as Koṣṭhila again.|“He Who Has Long Fingernails,” Koṣṭhila’s name after he joined an order of wandering ascetics to continue his studies of Lokāyata philosophy. He later joined the Buddhist order and was known as Koṣṭhila again. 
དཀྱིལ-འཁོར	 A demarcated area within a larger boundary. An official act of the saṅgha requires a “consensus” of all monks present within the monastery’s boundaries or of a quorum of monks within an “inner circle.” | A mystic diagram, usually consisting of a square within a circle, used to define a sacred space in the context of esoteric rituals of initiation and consecration preliminary to certain advanced meditational practices. | Also rendered in this sūtra as “disc.” | Also rendered in this sūtra as “maṇḍala.” | In the higher tantras this is usually a diagram representing the details of the visualization of a deity and its palace and retinue. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha it is a simpler representation of a few deities, made of precious powders.| In the higher tantras this is usually a diagram representing the details of the visualization of a deity and its palace and retinue. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha it is a simpler representation of a few deities, made of precious powders. |Also rendered in this sūtra as “maṇḍala.” 
ཕྱག-དར	An acceptable type of clothing for a Buddhist monk, as detailed in the Four Resources section.
སོ-སོ-ཡང-དག-པར-རིག-པ	There are four: the discernments of meaning, phenomena, definitions, and eloquence.
ངེས-པའི-ཚིག-སོ-སོ-ཡང-དག-པར-རིག-པ	 Third of the four unhindered discernments. See also “etymology.”\nunhindered discernment of etymological definitions| Third of the four unhindered discernments. See also “etymology.”\nunhindered discernment of etymological definitions |Third of the four unhindered discernments. See also “etymology.”\nunhindered discernment of etymological definitions 
དོན-སོ-སོ-ཡང-དག-པར-རིག-པ	 First of the four unhindered discernments.|First of the four unhindered discernments. 
སྤོབས-པ-སོ-སོ-ཡང-དག-པར-རིག-པ	 Fourth of the four unhindered discernments. Inspiration here is the means by which the teachings are enunciated.| Fourth of the four unhindered discernments. Inspiration here is the means by which the teachings are enunciated. |Fourth of the four unhindered discernments. Inspiration here is the means by which the teachings are enunciated. 
ཆོས-སོ-སོ-ཡང-དག-པར-རིག-པ	 Second of the four unhindered discernments.|Second of the four unhindered discernments. 
སོ-སོར-མ-བརྟགས-པའི-བཏང-སྙོམས-མེད-པ	 Sixth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. Also rendered here as as “without indifference that does not make distinctions.”\nwithout indifference that does not make distinctions|Sixth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. Also rendered here as as “without indifference that does not make distinctions.”\nwithout indifference that does not make distinctions 
འཕགས-པ-ཉན-ཐོས	 A practitioner of the disciple vehicle teaching who has reached at least the initial stages of realization.| A practitioner of the disciple vehicle teaching who has reached at least the initial stages of realization. |A practitioner of the disciple vehicle teaching who has reached at least the initial stages of realization. 
ཐེག-པ-དམན-པ	 Literally “the lesser way” or “lesser vehicle.” It is a collective term for the śrāvakayāna and pratyeka­buddha­yāna, which have nirvāṇa instead of buddhahood as their goal. | See “disciple vehicle.”| See “disciple vehicle.” | The “Lesser Vehicle” of Buddhism, taught by the Buddha for those unable immediately to conceive the spirit of enlightenment, as a means for them to attain personal liberation. It is used of course in the Mahāyāna sūtras, as a contrast to their own “Great Vehicle,” which is taught as a means for living beings of the loftiest aspiration to attain the liberation of self and others through simultaneous perfection of wisdom and compassion, that is called Buddhahood. |The “Lesser Vehicle” of Buddhism, taught by the Buddha for those unable immediately to conceive the spirit of enlightenment, as a means for them to attain personal liberation. It is used of course in the Mahāyāna sūtras, as a contrast to their own “Great Vehicle,” which is taught as a means for living beings of the loftiest aspiration to attain the liberation of self and others through simultaneous perfection of wisdom and compassion, that is called Buddhahood. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས	A mind set on abandoning the undisciplined conduct of body, speech, and mind.
ཁྱད-པར-གྱི-སྤྱོད-པ	 A monk serving a punitive sentence, a demotion or probation, must accept a temporary demotion in status that involves rejecting the honors accorded to observant monks and adopting a position of deference.|A monk serving a punitive sentence, a demotion or probation, must accept a temporary demotion in status that involves rejecting the honors accorded to observant monks and adopting a position of deference. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Fourth of the ten recollections.| Fourth of the ten recollections. |Fourth of the ten recollections. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 Second of the six transcendent perfections.| Second of the six transcendent perfections. |Second of the six transcendent perfections. 
སྦྱངས-དག	Ascetic practices that are optional for monks and nuns or undertaken only for a defined time period. They are traditionally listed as being twelve in number: (1) wearing rags (pāṃśukūlika, {phyag dar khrod pa}), (2) (in the form of only) three religious robes (traicīvarika, {chos gos gsum}), (3) (coarse in texture as) garments of felt (nāma[n]tika, {'phyings pa pa}), (4) eating by alms (paiṇḍapātika, {bsod snyoms pa}), (5) having a single mat to sit on (aikāsanika, {stan gcig pa}), (6) not eating after noon (khalu paścād bhaktika, {zas phyis mi len pa}), (7) living alone in the forest (āraṇyaka, {dgon pa pa}), (8) living at the base of a tree (vṛkṣamūlika, {shing drungs pa}), (9) living in the open (ābhyavakāśika, {bla gab med pa}), (10) frequenting cemeteries (śmāśānika, {dur khrod pa}), (11) sleeping sitting up (naiṣadika, {cog bu pa}), and (12) accepting whatever seating position is offered (yāthāsaṃstarika, {gzhi ji bzhin pa}); this last of the twelve is sometimes interpreted as not omitting any house on the almsround, i.e. regardless of any reception expected. Mahāvyutpatti, 1127-39.
སྦྱངས-ཚུལ	Ascetic practices that are optional for monks and nuns or undertaken only for a defined time period. They are traditionally listed as being twelve in number: (1) wearing rags (pāṃśukūlika, {phyag dar khrod pa}), (2) (in the form of only) three religious robes (traicīvarika, {chos gos gsum}), (3) (coarse in texture as) garments of felt (nāma[n]tika, {'phyings pa pa}), (4) eating by alms (paiṇḍapātika, {bsod snyoms pa}), (5) having a single mat to sit on (aikāsanika, {stan gcig pa}), (6) not eating after noon (khalu paścād bhaktika, {zas phyis mi len pa}), (7) living alone in the forest (āraṇyaka, {dgon pa pa}), (8) living at the base of a tree (vṛkṣamūlika, {shing drungs pa}), (9) living in the open (ābhyavakāśika, {bla gab med pa}), (10) frequenting cemeteries (śmāśānika, {dur khrod pa}), (11) sleeping sitting up (naiṣadika, {cog bu pa}), and (12) accepting whatever seating position is offered (yāthāsaṃstarika, {gzhi ji bzhin pa}); this last of the twelve is sometimes interpreted as not omitting any house on the almsround, i.e. regardless of any reception expected. Mahāvyutpatti, 1127-39.
རྟོག-པ	 The ordinary activity of the mental consciousness, also translated as conceptual thought.|The ordinary activity of the mental consciousness, also translated as conceptual thought. 
དབེན-པ	 Also translated here as “void.”| Also translated here as “voidness.” | Equivalent to {med pa} (non-existent) or {stong pa} (empty), with a sense of ‘being devoid of.’ |This term usually has to do with a subjective state of ‘isolation,’ ‘separation,’ or ‘withdrawal,’ rather than a metaphysical idea. The Akṣayamatinirdeśa-sūtra contains a more or less parallel discussion of {dben pa nyid} in connection with diligence: “{de la 'jug pa gang zhe na gang dge ba'i rtsa ba thams cad rtsom pa'o/ gnas pa gang zhe na. gangs sems dben pa'o}.” Jens Braarvig translates this passage: “What then is activity? Undertaking all roots of good. What then is stillness? Aloofness of thought.” (Braarvig, vol. 1, pp. 175-76; vol. 2, p. 50.) Here {sems dben pa} is glossed in the Akṣayamatinirdeśaṭīkā (of Vasubandhu or perhaps Sthiramati) as: {sems dben pa ni mi dge ba spangs pa dang dge ba rtsom pa gang la yang mi rtog pa'o}. This can be translated as, “Disengagement of one’s thought is not thinking at all about giving up the non-virtuous and undertaking the virtuous.” In any case, the term viviktatā in this context and in the Akṣayamatinirdeśa does not seem to be about emptiness, but more about a type of aloof or disengaged diligence that does not conceptualize the virtues and non-virtues of the actions undertaken. 
རྣམ-པར-འཐོར-བ	 Name of the sixtieth meditative stability.|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1109. 
ནེམ-ནུར-རྣམ-པར-སེལ-བ	Name of the eightieth meditative stability.
ལུས-ཀྱི-ཡང-དག-པར-སེལ-བ	Name of the 109th meditative stability.
དོར-བ-མེད-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Eleventh of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Eleventh of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Eleventh of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
སྲིད-པའི-འདམ-བུ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཕུང-པོ-མེད-པར-རྣམ-པར-འཐོར-བ	 Name of the eighty-sixth meditative stability.| Name of the eighty-sixth meditative stability. |Name of the eighty-sixth meditative stability. 
ཡང-དག-པར-རྗེས-སུ-མི-མཐོང-བ	 Also translated here as “disregard.”|Also translated here as “do not consider.” 
རིམས-ལྡང-དུབ-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཚིག-ཐམས-ཅད-རབ-ཏུ-འབྱེད-པ	 Name of the sixty-first meditative stability.|Name of the sixty-first meditative stability. 
རྐྱལ-ཆེན	A member of an oceangoing ship’s crew whose job was to dive for pearls. Can also mean “fisherman.”
ལྷའི-མིག	 Second of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1117.\neye of clairvoyance|One of the six “superknowledges” (q.v.) as well as one of the “five eyes,” this is the supernormal ability to see to an unlimited distance, observe events on other worlds, see through mountains, etc. The five eyes consist of five different faculties of vision: the physical eye (māṃsa­cakṣu), the divine eye (dīvya­cakṣu), the wisdom eye (prajñā­cakṣu), the Dharma-eye (dharma­cakṣu), and the Buddha-eye (buddha­cakṣu). 
མདུན-ན-འདོན	 A traditional Vedic priest.|A traditional Vedic priest. 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ	 Tenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.|Tenth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ	Eighth of the eighten distinct qualities of the buddhas.
དྲན-པ-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ	 Ninth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.|Ninth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
འདུན-པ-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ	Seventh of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-རྣམ-གྲངས	 Also translated here as “doctrinal sūtra.” | Also translated here as “scriptural categories.”|Also translated here as “scriptural categories.” 
དཱུར-བ	Cynodon dactylon.
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པའི-སྒོ	 Emptiness, absence of attributes, and absence of aspiration. | There are three, namely emptiness as a gateway to liberation, signlessness as a gateway to liberation, and aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation. Among them, emptiness is characterized as the absence of inherent existence, signlessness as the absence of mental images, and aspirationlessness as the absence of hopes and fears.\ngateways to liberation| There are three, namely emptiness as a gateway to liberation, signlessness as a gateway to liberation, and aspirationlessness as a gateway to liberation. Among them, emptiness is characterized as the absence of inherent existence, signlessness as the absence of mental images, and aspirationlessness as the absence of hopes and fears.\ngateways to liberation |Emptiness, absence of attributes, and absence of aspiration. 
སྣ-ཚོགས-རྡོ-རྗེ	 Two crossed vajras.| Two crossed vajras. |Two crossed vajras. 
དྷུ-ཏུ-ར	 Datura metel.|Datura metel. 
སྟོབས-བརྟན	 A king in the time of Buddha Ghoṣadatta. Also the father of the rebirth of King Śirībala in the time of Buddha Narendraghoṣa.|A king in the time of Buddha Ghoṣadatta. Also the father of the rebirth of King Śirībala in the time of Buddha Narendraghoṣa. 
བརྟན-པས-བྱིན	 A king in the distant past.|A king in the distant past. 
དཔའ-བརྟན	 The name of all the buddhas who had been followers of King Mahābala in a previous lifetime.|The name of all the buddhas who had been followers of King Mahābala in a previous lifetime. 
མེ-བ-རལ-པ-ཅན	The name by which the Jaṭila ascetic order is known in the Vinaya. Jaṭila were early converts of the Buddha. Many were said to have converted en masse after the Buddha delivered the “Fire Sermon” (Pali Ādittapariyāya Sutta) to Kāśyapa and his followers at Uruvilvā. See the Saṅghabhedavastu (Tib. {dge 'dun dbyen gyi gzhi}) for the Mūlasarvāstivādin account of their conversion.
སྐྲོད-པ	A type of magical activity aiming to render a person homeless, or drive away non-human beings.
འབྲོག-མི-ཤཱཀྱ-ཡེ-ཤེས	Drokmi Śākya Yeshé, the great 11th century translator from Lhatsé in Western Tsang.
སྒྲོམ	 A measure of capacity or volume, and sometimes of weight, roughly equivalent to 5 liters or 9.5 kilograms. It can also be used to denote a vessel or container of that capacity, hence the Tibetan translation here sgrom, “box” or “chest,” which is a little misleading in the passage in this text.|A measure of capacity or volume, and sometimes of weight, roughly equivalent to 5 liters or 9.5 kilograms. It can also be used to denote a vessel or container of that capacity, hence the Tibetan translation here sgrom, “box” or “chest,” which is a little misleading in the passage in this text. 
དྲོ-ན-པུཥྚ	 Leucas cephalotes.|Leucas cephalotes. 
ལྗོན-པ	 King of the kiṃnaras. | One of the four kings of the kinnaras. He is present at the teaching of the sūtra.| One of the four kings of the kinnaras. He is present at the teaching of the sūtra. |King of the kiṃnaras. 
ཤོ-བྷ-ཛན	Moringa oleifera.
སྒ	Zingiber officinale.
བཅའ-སྒ	Zingiber officinale.
སྒ-སྐྱ	Zingiber officinale.
གཡའ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
གཉིས-བརྗོད-པ	See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1140.
དུ-གུ-ལའི-རས	Also spelled dukula and dugulla, this has been identified differently over the centuries as a kind of barkfibre cloth, woven silk, linen, and cloth made from cotton grown in Ganda. It is considered an acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བཟོད-དཀའ	 Buddha of the universe Marīci, located sixty-one universes away; mentioned also in other Mahāyāna sūtras, with the interesting coincidence that his teaching ceased at the moment Śākyamuni began teaching at Benares.|Buddha of the universe Marīci, located sixty-one universes away; mentioned also in other Mahāyāna sūtras, with the interesting coincidence that his teaching ceased at the moment Śākyamuni began teaching at Benares. 
རྨུགས-གཉིད	 Third of the five obscurations.|Third of the five obscurations. 
རྔ-དབྱངས	 A bodhisattva who only appears in Mahāyāna sūtras. It is also a name for various buddhas, including an alternative name for Buddha Amoghasiddhi. Incorrectly translated as {mngon par 'byung dka'}|A bodhisattva who only appears in Mahāyāna sūtras. It is also a name for various buddhas, including an alternative name for Buddha Amoghasiddhi. Incorrectly translated as {mngon par 'byung dka'} 
ཏུན-ཧོང	Site of the Magao Caves in Gansu Province, China.
མངོན-པར-འབྱུང-དཀའ	 Name of a bodhisattva only mentioned in one other sūtra.|Name of a bodhisattva only mentioned in one other sūtra. 
འབྱུང-དཀའ	 Name of a bodhisattva only mentioned in one other sūtra.|Name of a bodhisattva only mentioned in one other sūtra. 
རབ-ཏུ-ཐུལ-དཀའ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཕོ-ཉ	 A class of nonhuman beings; the name literally means "messenger," which could imply that these beings can be employed as messengers through magical rites.|A class of nonhuman beings; the name literally means "messenger," which could imply that these beings can be employed as messengers through magical rites. 
མིའུ-ཐུང	 A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.\ndwarves|A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.\ndwarves 
བིཥྞུ-ཀྲཱནྟ	 Evolvulus alsinoides.|Evolvulus alsinoides. 
སྔོན-གྱི-ཆོ-ག	The early ordination rite, later adapted to include stricter criteria for admission and introduce the intermediate step, between joining the order and ordination, of induction into the novitiate.
ས-ཕུག	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
གཟུགས	 Physical forms include the subtle and manifest forms derived from the material elements.| Physical forms include the subtle and manifest forms derived from the material elements. | See “aggregate.” | The first of the five aggregates; but also, in this sūtra, “inner form” within consciousness (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-044-003.html#UT22084-044-003-48). |Effigy of the target used in magical rites. 
གཟུགས-བརྙན	An effigy used in sympathetic magic.
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པ-བརྒྱད	 The eight aspects of liberation ensue: (1) when corporeal beings observe physical forms [in order to compose the mind]; (2) when formless beings endowed with internal perception observe external physical forms; (3) when beings are inclined toward pleasant states; (4) when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’ (5) The fifth ensues when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ (6) The sixth is when one achieves and abides in the sense field of nothing-at-all, thinking, ‘There is nothing at all.’ (7) The seventh is when one achieves and abides in the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception. (8) The eighth is when one achieves and abides in the cessation of all perceptions and feelings.\nFor a more complete description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-176. | The first consists of the seeing of form by one who has form; the second consists of the seeing of external form by one with the concept of internal formlessness; the third consists of the physical realization of pleasant liberation and its successful consolidation; the fourth consists of the full entrance to the infinity of space through transcending all conceptions of matter, and the subsequent decline of conceptions of resistance and discredit of conceptions of diversity; the fifth consists of full entrance into the infinity of consciousness, having transcended the infinity of space; the sixth consists of the full entrance into the sphere of nothingness, having transcended the sphere of the infinity of conscious­ness; the seventh consists of the full entrance into the sphere of neither conscious­ness nor un­conscious­ness, having transcended the sphere of nothingness; the eighth consists of the perfect cessation of suffering, having transcended the sphere of neither conscious­ness nor un­conscious­ness. Thus the first three liberations form specific links to the ordinary perceptual world; the fourth to seventh are equivalent to the four absorptions; and the eighth represents the highest attainment.| The first consists of the seeing of form by one who has form; the second consists of the seeing of external form by one with the concept of internal formlessness; the third consists of the physical realization of pleasant liberation and its successful consolidation; the fourth consists of the full entrance to the infinity of space through transcending all conceptions of matter, and the subsequent decline of conceptions of resistance and discredit of conceptions of diversity; the fifth consists of full entrance into the infinity of consciousness, having transcended the infinity of space; the sixth consists of the full entrance into the sphere of nothingness, having transcended the sphere of the infinity of conscious­ness; the seventh consists of the full entrance into the sphere of neither conscious­ness nor un­conscious­ness, having transcended the sphere of nothingness; the eighth consists of the perfect cessation of suffering, having transcended the sphere of neither conscious­ness nor un­conscious­ness. Thus the first three liberations form specific links to the ordinary perceptual world; the fourth to seventh are equivalent to the four absorptions; and the eighth represents the highest attainment. |The eight aspects of liberation ensue: (1) when corporeal beings observe physical forms [in order to compose the mind]; (2) when formless beings endowed with internal perception observe external physical forms; (3) when beings are inclined toward pleasant states; (4) when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite space, thinking, ‘Space is infinite.’ (5) The fifth ensues when one achieves and abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness, thinking, ‘Consciousness is infinite.’ (6) The sixth is when one achieves and abides in the sense field of nothing-at-all, thinking, ‘There is nothing at all.’ (7) The seventh is when one achieves and abides in the sense field of neither perception nor non-perception. (8) The eighth is when one achieves and abides in the cessation of all perceptions and feelings.\nFor a more complete description, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-176. 
ཚེའི-རིག-པ-ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད-པ	The eight branches are: 1) śalya (surgery), 2) śālākya (treatment of diseases of the head and neck), 3) agada (treatment of poisoning), 4) kumāra bharaṇa (pediatrics), 5) kāya cikitsā (treatment of internal diseases), 6) bhūta kriyā (treatment of diseases caused by spirits), 7) vāji karaṇa (aphrodisiacs), and 8) rasāyana (rejuvenation).
མི-ཁོམ-བརྒྱད	 Being born as a hell being, preta, animal, god, barbarian, human with wrong views, where there is no buddha, or as a human with impaired faculties.| Being born as a hell being, preta, animal, god, barbarian, human with wrong views, where there is no buddha, or as a human with impaired faculties. |Being reborn in hell, or as a preta, an animal, or a long-lived deity (of the formless realms), or being a human in a time without a Buddha’s teaching, in a land without the teaching, with a defective mind, or without faith. 
འཇིགས-པ-བརྒྱད	Fear of lions, elephants, fire, snakes, drowning, bondage, thieves, and demons.
ལོག-པ-ཉིད-བརྒྱད	 The eight wrong modes are: wrong view, wrong thought, wrong speech, wrong actions, wrong livelihood, wrong effort, wrong recollection, and wrong samādhi.| These consist of the exact opposites of the eight branches of the eightfold noble path (aṣṭāngikamārga). |Eight misunderstandings of the way things are. 
དུར-ཁྲོད-ཆེན-པོ-བརྒྱད	eight charnel grounds
དམྱལ-བ-ཆེན-པོ-བརྒྱད	 On the eight great hells, see Patrul Rinpoche’s commentary in Padmakara Translation Group (1984): 63–69.|On the eight great hells, see Patrul Rinpoche’s commentary in Padmakara Translation Group (1984): 63–69. 
དངོས-གྲུབ-ཆེན-པོ-བརྒྱད	Eight “ordinary” accomplishments attained through practice: (1) eye medicine (añjana, {mig sman}); (2) swift-footedness (jaṅghākara, {rkang mgyogs}); (3) magic sword (khaḍga, {ral gri}); (4) travel beneath the earth (pātāla, {sa 'og spyod}); (5) medicinal pills (gulikā, {ril bu}); (6) travel in the sky (khecara, {mkha' spyod}); (7) invisibility (antardhāna, {mi snang ba}); and (8) elixir (rasāyana, {bcud len}). (From Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo’s commentary).
གང-ཟག-བརྒྱད	See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1460.
ལོག-པའི-ཆོས-བརྒྱད	Possibly, this is identical to the eight worldly dharmas: hoping for happiness, fame, praise, and gain, and fearing suffering, slander, blame, and loss.
ལོག-པ-བརྒྱད	These consist of the exact opposites of the eight branches of the eightfold noble path (aṣṭāngikamārga).
ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད	Abstaining from killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, intoxication, eating after noon, dancing and singing, and lying on an elevated bed.
ཡང-དག-པ-ཉིད-བརྒྱད	The eight right modes are: right view, right thought, right speech, right actions, right livelihood, right effort, right recollection, and right samādhi.
ཟིལ-གྱིས-གནོན-པའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བརྒྱད	 These refer to the miraculous perceptual transformation that ensues when one: (1) regards lesser external forms; (2) regards greater external forms; (3) regards blue external forms; (4) regards yellow external forms; (5) regards red external forms; (6) regards white external forms; (7) abides in the sense field of infinite space; (8) abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness.\nFor a complete explanation, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-205.|These refer to the miraculous perceptual transformation that ensues when one: (1) regards lesser external forms; (2) regards greater external forms; (3) regards blue external forms; (4) regards yellow external forms; (5) regards red external forms; (6) regards white external forms; (7) abides in the sense field of infinite space; (8) abides in the sense field of infinite consciousness.\nFor a complete explanation, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-205. 
མི-ཁོམ-པ-བརྒྱད	 Lives led in circumstances that do not provide the freedom to practice Buddhist path, i.e., the realms of (1) the hells, (2) pretas, (3) animals, and (4) long-lived gods; (in the human realm) among (5) barbarians, (6) extremists, and (7) in places where the Buddhist teachings do not exist; and (8) without adequate faculties to understand the teachings where they do exist.|The eight unfavorable conditions for Buddhist practice, which are well known in the context of the preliminary practices ({sngon 'gro}), comprise birth among the denizens of the hells, as anguished spirits, animals, long-lived gods, frontier tribesmen beyond the pale of cilvization, those whose sense faculties are incomplete, and those who maintain wrong views. See Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 20–21. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཆོས-བརྒྱད	 Hoping for happiness, fame, praise and gain and fearing suffering, insignificance, blame and loss.|Hoping for happiness, fame, praise and gain and fearing suffering, insignificance, blame and loss. 
འཕགས-པའི-ལམ-ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད-པ	 Correct view, intention, speech, actions, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration. | Eight factors whereby the training on the path of cultivation takes place.|Eight factors whereby the training on the path of cultivation takes place. 
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-བཅོ-བརྒྱད	 The eighteen aspects of emptiness, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-212, comprise (1) emptiness of internal phenomena, (2) emptiness of external phenomena, (3) emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, (4) emptiness of emptiness, (5) emptiness of great extent, (6) emptiness of ultimate reality, (7) emptiness of conditioned phenomena, (8) emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, (9) emptiness of the unlimited, (10) emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, (11) emptiness of non-dispersal, (12) emptiness of inherent existence, (13) emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, (14) emptiness of all things, (15) emptiness of non-apprehension, (16) emptiness of non-entities, (17) emptiness of essential nature, and (18) emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-213.\n[eighteen] aspects of emptiness| The eighteen aspects of emptiness, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-212, comprise (1) emptiness of internal phenomena, (2) emptiness of external phenomena, (3) emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, (4) emptiness of emptiness, (5) emptiness of great extent, (6) emptiness of ultimate reality, (7) emptiness of conditioned phenomena, (8) emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, (9) emptiness of the unlimited, (10) emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, (11) emptiness of non-dispersal, (12) emptiness of inherent existence, (13) emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, (14) emptiness of all things, (15) emptiness of non-apprehension, (16) emptiness of non-entities, (17) emptiness of essential nature, and (18) emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-213.\n[eighteen] aspects of emptiness |The eighteen aspects of emptiness, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-212, comprise (1) emptiness of internal phenomena, (2) emptiness of external phenomena, (3) emptiness of both external and internal phenomena, (4) emptiness of emptiness, (5) emptiness of great extent, (6) emptiness of ultimate reality, (7) emptiness of conditioned phenomena, (8) emptiness of unconditioned phenomena, (9) emptiness of the unlimited, (10) emptiness of that which has neither beginning nor end, (11) emptiness of non-dispersal, (12) emptiness of inherent existence, (13) emptiness of intrinsic defining characteristics, (14) emptiness of all things, (15) emptiness of non-apprehension, (16) emptiness of non-entities, (17) emptiness of essential nature, and (18) emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-213.\n[eighteen] aspects of emptiness 
རིགས-གནས-ཆེན-པོ-བཅོ-བརྒྱད	 The eighteen great fields of knowledge are listed in the Mahāvyutpatti as (1) music ( gandharva , {rol mo}), (2) love-making (vaiśika, {'khrig thabs}), (3) sustenance (vārtā, {'tsho tshis}), (4) arithmetic (sāṃkhyā, {grangs can}), (5) grammar (śabda, {sgra}), (6) medicine (cikitsita, {gso dpyad}), (7) behavior (nīti, {chos lugs}), (8) fine arts (śilpa, {bzo}), (9) archery (dhanurveda, {'phongs}), (10) logic (hetu, {gtan tshigs}), (11) yoga ({rnal 'byor}), (12) study (śruti, {thos pa}), (13) recollection (sṃṛti, {dran pa}), (14) astronomy (jyotitiṣa, {skar ma'i dpyad}), (15) astrology (gaṇita, {rtsis}), (16) optical aberrations (māyā, {mig 'phrul 'khor}), (17) antiquity (purāṇa, {sngon gyi rabs}), and (18) history (itihāsaka, {sngon byung ba}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315.|The eighteen great fields of knowledge are listed in the Mahāvyutpatti as (1) music ( gandharva , {rol mo}), (2) love-making (vaiśika, {'khrig thabs}), (3) sustenance (vārtā, {'tsho tshis}), (4) arithmetic (sāṃkhyā, {grangs can}), (5) grammar (śabda, {sgra}), (6) medicine (cikitsita, {gso dpyad}), (7) behavior (nīti, {chos lugs}), (8) fine arts (śilpa, {bzo}), (9) archery (dhanurveda, {'phongs}), (10) logic (hetu, {gtan tshigs}), (11) yoga ({rnal 'byor}), (12) study (śruti, {thos pa}), (13) recollection (sṃṛti, {dran pa}), (14) astronomy (jyotitiṣa, {skar ma'i dpyad}), (15) astrology (gaṇita, {rtsis}), (16) optical aberrations (māyā, {mig 'phrul 'khor}), (17) antiquity (purāṇa, {sngon gyi rabs}), and (18) history (itihāsaka, {sngon byung ba}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315. 
རོལ-མོའི-བྱེ-བྲག-བཅོ-བརྒྱད	The eighteen requisites of musical performance, contained in the sixty-four crafts, are (1) the dancer (nartaka, {gar mkhan}); (2) the dance (nāṭya, {bro}); (3) kettledrum (bherī, {rnga bo che}); (4) clay drum (mṛdaṅga, {rdza rnga}); (5) tambour (muraja, {rnga phran}); (6) large kettledrum (dundubhi, {rnga chen po}); (7) small cymbal (paṇava, {'khar rnga}); (8) single-string lute (tuṇava, {pi vang rgyud gcig pa}); (9) one-sided clay drum (eka­mukha­mṛdaṅga, {rdza rnga kha gcig pa}); (10) metal bell (illarī, {lcags kyi sil khrol}); (11) bell-metal cymbals (sampa, {mkhar ba'i sil khrol}); (12) three-string lute (ballarī, {pi vang rgyud gsum pa}); (13) mukunda drum (mukunda, {rnga mukunda}); (14) harmony of percussion and singing (gītopa­kṣipya­tūrya, {sil snyan glu dbyangs dang bstun pa}); (15) musical tempo (tālāvacara, {pheg rdob}); (16) instrumentation (vādyaśabda, {rol mo'i sgra}); (17) lute (vīṇā, {pi vang}); and (18) flute (veṇu, {gling bu}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315.
ཁམས-བཅོ-བརྒྱད	 The eighteen sensory elements, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-151, comprise (1) the sensory element of the eyes, (2) the sensory element of sights, and (3) the sensory element of visual consciousness; (4) the sensory element of the ears, (5) the sensory element of sounds, and (6) the sensory element of auditory consciousness; (7) the sensory element of the nose, (8) the sensory element of odors, and (9) the sensory element of olfactory consciousness; (10) the sensory element of the tongue, (11) the sensory element of tastes, and (12) the sensory element of gustatory consciousness; (13) the sensory element of the body, (14) the sensory element of tangibles, and (15) the sensory element of tactile consciousness; and (16) the sensory element of the mental faculty, (17) the sensory element of mental phenomena, and (18) the sensory element of mental consciousness.|The eighteen sensory elements, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-151, comprise (1) the sensory element of the eyes, (2) the sensory element of sights, and (3) the sensory element of visual consciousness; (4) the sensory element of the ears, (5) the sensory element of sounds, and (6) the sensory element of auditory consciousness; (7) the sensory element of the nose, (8) the sensory element of odors, and (9) the sensory element of olfactory consciousness; (10) the sensory element of the tongue, (11) the sensory element of tastes, and (12) the sensory element of gustatory consciousness; (13) the sensory element of the body, (14) the sensory element of tangibles, and (15) the sensory element of tactile consciousness; and (16) the sensory element of the mental faculty, (17) the sensory element of mental phenomena, and (18) the sensory element of mental consciousness. 
འཕགས-པའི-ལམ-གྱི-ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད	 These are right view (samyagdṛṣṭi), right consideration (samyak­saṃkalpa), right speech (samyakvāk), right terminal action (samyak­karmānta), right livelihood (samyagajiva), right effort (samyag­vyāyāma), right remembrance (samyak­smṛti), and right concentration (samyak­samādhi). They are variously defined in the different Buddhist schools. These eight form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment (see entry).\neightfold path\neight branches of the holy path| These are right view (samyagdṛṣṭi), right consideration (samyak­saṃkalpa), right speech (samyakvāk), right terminal action (samyak­karmānta), right livelihood (samyagajiva), right effort (samyag­vyāyāma), right remembrance (samyak­smṛti), and right concentration (samyak­samādhi). They are variously defined in the different Buddhist schools. These eight form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment (see entry).\neightfold path\neight branches of the holy path |These are right view (samyagdṛṣṭi), right consideration (samyak­saṃkalpa), right speech (samyakvāk), right terminal action (samyak­karmānta), right livelihood (samyagajiva), right effort (samyag­vyāyāma), right remembrance (samyak­smṛti), and right concentration (samyak­samādhi). They are variously defined in the different Buddhist schools. These eight form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment (see entry).\neightfold path\neight branches of the holy path 
འཕགས-ལམ-ཡང-ལག-བརྒྱད	The Buddhist path as presented in the śrāvaka vehicle: right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, right samādhi.
འཕགས-པའི-ལམ-ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད	 Correct view, intention, speech, actions, livelihood, effort, mindfulness, and concentration. | The noble eightfold path, enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-165, comprises (1) correct view, (2) correct ideation, (3) correct speech, (4) correct action, (5) correct livelihood, (6) correct effort, (7) correct recollection, and (8) correct meditative stability.| The noble eightfold path, enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-165, comprises (1) correct view, (2) correct ideation, (3) correct speech, (4) correct action, (5) correct livelihood, (6) correct effort, (7) correct recollection, and (8) correct meditative stability. |The noble eightfold path, enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-165, comprises (1) correct view, (2) correct ideation, (3) correct speech, (4) correct action, (5) correct livelihood, (6) correct effort, (7) correct recollection, and (8) correct meditative stability. 
དཔེ-བྱད-བཟང-པོ-བརྒྱད-ཅུ	For their enumeration see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-292 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2396.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-293).\neighty minor marks
ལུང-གཅིག-ལས-འཕྲོས-པ	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1639.|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1639. 
ཨེ-ལའི-འདབ-མ	 A nāga king who in the lifetime of the previous buddha had cut down a tree and had therefore been reborn as a nāga. Residing in Taxila, he is said to have miraculously extended himself to where the Buddha was present. This tale is found represented in ancient sculpture.|A nāga king who in the lifetime of the previous buddha had cut down a tree and had therefore been reborn as a nāga. Residing in Taxila, he is said to have miraculously extended himself to where the Buddha was present. This tale is found represented in ancient sculpture. 
གནས-བརྟན	 A monk of seniority within the assembly of the śrāvakas.| A monk of seniority within the assembly of the śrāvakas. | A monk who possesses the qualities of stability and knowledge. | Literally “one who is stable” and is usually translated as “elder”; a senior teacher in the early Buddhist communities. Also became the name of the Buddhist tradition within which the Theravada developed. | Literally “one who is stable” and usually translated as “elder,” a senior teacher in the early Buddhist communities. Also became the name of the Buddhist tradition within which the Theravada developed. | The term is used to designate a senior monk. The sixteen great arhats, or sixteen noble elders (āryasthavira), were the successors of the Buddha's teaching after he passed. They promised to preserve the teaching until the coming of the future Buddha Maitreya. They are on the path of seeing of the arhat path. Each arhat lived in a specific place: (1) Aṅgaja on Mt. Kailash; (2) Ajita in the Crystal Wood of Sages; (3) Vanavāsin on Mt. Saptaparṇa; (4) Mahākālika in Tāmradvīpa; (5) Vajrīputra in Siṃhaladvīpa; (6) Śrībhadra on Yamunādvīpa; (7) Kanakavatsa in Kashmir; (8) Kanakabharadvāja in the Western continent of Godānīya; (9) Bakula in the northern continent of Uttarakuru; (10) Rāhula in Priyaṅgudvīpa; (11) Cūḍapanthaka on Mt. Gṛdhrakūṭa; (12) Piṇḍolabharadvāja in the eastern continent of Pūrvavideha; (13) Mahāpanthaka in Trayatriṃśa; (14) Nāgasena on Mt. Meru; (15) Gopaka on Mt. Bhihula; (16) Abhedya in the Himālayas. |A monk who possesses the qualities of stability and knowledge. 
གནས-བརྟན-བྱིས-པ	 A monk who has been ordained for at least ten years yet still cannot recite thePrātimokṣasūtraor its supplements and is thus not entitled to grant entry into the order, grant ordination, oversee novices, give shelter, or live independently.|A monk who has been ordained for at least ten years yet still cannot recite thePrātimokṣasūtraor its supplements and is thus not entitled to grant entry into the order, grant ordination, oversee novices, give shelter, or live independently. 
གནས-བརྟན-གྱི-སྡེ	 One of the eighteen nikāya schools.|One of the eighteen nikāya schools. 
སྒྲའི-ཁམས	 Fifth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Fifth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Fifth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
དྲིའི-ཁམས	 Eighth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Eighth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Eighth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-ཁམས	 One of the three realms of saṃsāra, characterized by coarse materiality similar to the desire realm. | Second of the eighteen sensory elements.| Second of the eighteen sensory elements. |Second of the eighteen sensory elements. 
རེག-བྱའི-ཁམས	 Fourteenth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Fourteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Fourteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
རོའི-ཁམས	 Eleventh of the eighteen sensory elements.| Eleventh of the eighteen sensory elements. |Eleventh of the eighteen sensory elements. 
ལྕེའི-ཁམས	 Tenth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Tenth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Tenth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
རྣའི-ཁམས	 Fourth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Fourth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Fourth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
སྣའི-ཁམས	 Seventh of the eighteen sensory elements.| Seventh of the eighteen sensory elements. |Seventh of the eighteen sensory elements. 
མིག-གི-ཁམས	 First of the eighteen sensory elements.| First of the eighteen sensory elements. |First of the eighteen sensory elements. 
ལུས-ཀྱི-ཁམས	 Thirteenth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Thirteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Thirteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
ཡིད-ཀྱི-ཁམས	 Sixteenth of the eighteen sensory elements.| Sixteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. |Sixteenth of the eighteen sensory elements. 
ཁམས-ཀྱི-རང-བཞིན-གསུམ	 Desire, anger, and delusion: as a collective term for this common set of the three basic kleśas, this appears to be unique to this sūtra.|Desire, anger, and delusion: as a collective term for this common set of the three basic kleśas, this appears to be unique to this sūtra. 
ཀ-པི-ཏྠ	 Limonia elephantianum (Correa), Feronia limonia (Linn).|Limonia elephantianum (Correa), Feronia limonia (Linn). 
རྐང-འབམ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
གཏན-ལ-དབབ-པ	 One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. It means “the explanation of details in the teachings” and is synonymous with abhidharma.|One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. It means “the explanation of details in the teachings” and is synonymous with abhidharma. 
ངེས-པར-བསྟན-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 The name of an extensive teaching that the Buddha is said to have taught directly preceding the Lotus Sūtra.|The name of an extensive teaching that the Buddha is said to have taught directly preceding the Lotus Sūtra. 
སྤྲུལ-པ	 One of the classes of beings barred from joining the renunciate order. The word {sprul pa} denotes a wide range of phenomena—emanations, apparitions, conjurings, shape-shifting creatures, etc.—all united by their tendency to morph through their own agency or another’s. We have therefore translated {sprul pa} according to context as “emanation,” “shape-shifter,” “trickster,” or “conjuring.”| See “emanated incarnation.” | See “shape-shifter.” | This refers to the miraculous power of the Buddha and bodhisattvas of a certain stage to emanate apparently living beings in order to develop and teach living beings. This power reaches its culmination in the nirmāṇa­kayā, the “incarnation body,” which is one of the three bodies of buddhahood and includes all physical forms of all buddhas, including Śākyamuni, whose sole function as incarnations is the development and liberation of living beings. |This refers to the miraculous power of the Buddha and bodhisattvas of a certain stage to emanate apparently living beings in order to develop and teach living beings. This power reaches its culmination in the nirmāṇa­kayā, the “incarnation body,” which is one of the three bodies of buddhahood and includes all physical forms of all buddhas, including Śākyamuni, whose sole function as incarnations is the development and liberation of living beings. 
རྣམ-པར-གྲོལ-བ	This denotes emancipation or withdrawal from worldly life. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8.
རྟག-ཏུ-བུ-དོན-ལྟར-བྲིས-པའི-ལུས-ཅན	A bodhisattva.
གཟི-བརྗིད-ཡིད-འོང-ཀུན-བསྡུས	A bodhisattva.
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-དབང	 An empowerment involving a female consort.| An empowerment involving a female consort. |An empowerment involving a female consort. 
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Emptiness denotes the ultimate nature of reality, the total absence of inherent existence and self-identity with respect to all phenomena. According to this view, all things and events are devoid of any independent, intrinsic reality that constitutes their essence. Nothing can be said to exist independently from the complex network of factors that gives rise to their origination, nor are phenomena independent of the cognitive processes and mental constructs that make up the conventional framework within which their identity and existence are posited. When all levels of conceptualization dissolve and when all forms of dichotomizing tendencies are quelled through deliberate meditative deconstruction of conceptual elaborations, the ultimate nature of reality will finally become manifest. | In the Mahāyāna this is the term for how phenomena are devoid of any nature of their own. One of the three doorways to liberation along with the absence of aspiration and the absence of attributes. | Meditative concentration which realizes the non-self of persons and phenomena; the first of the three doors of liberation. | See “emptiness.”| See “emptiness.” | This Skt. term is usually translated by “voidness” because that English word is more rarely used in other contexts than “emptiness” and does not refer to any sort of ultimate nothingness, as a thing-in-itself, or even as the thing-in-itself to end all things-in-themselves. It is a pure negation of the ultimate existence of anything or, in Buddhist terminology, the “emptiness with respect to personal and phenomenal selves,” or “with respect to identity,” or “with respect to intrinsic nature,” or “with respect to essential substance,” or “with respect to self-existence established by intrinsic identity,” or “with respect to ultimate truth-status,” etc. Thus emptiness is a concept descriptive of the ultimate reality through its pure negation of whatever may be supposed to be ultimately real. It is an absence, hence not existent in itself. It is synonymous therefore with “infinity,” “absolute,” etc.—themselves all negative terms, i.e., formed etymologically from a positive concept by adding a negative prefix (in + finite = not finite; ab + solute = not compounded, etc.). But, since our verbally conditioned mental functions are habituated to the connection of word and thing, we tend to hypostatize a “void,” analogous to “outer space,” a “vacuum,” etc., which we either shrink from as a nihilistic nothingness or become attached to as a liberative nothingness; this great mistake can be cured only by realizing the meaning of the “emptiness of emptiness,” which brings us to the tolerance of inconceivability (see “tolerance”). | Voidness, emptiness; specifically, the emptiness of absolute substance, truth, identity, intrinsic reality, or self of all persons and things in the relative world, being quite opposed to any sort of absolute nothingness (see glossary, under “emptiness”). |This Skt. term is usually translated by “voidness” because that English word is more rarely used in other contexts than “emptiness” and does not refer to any sort of ultimate nothingness, as a thing-in-itself, or even as the thing-in-itself to end all things-in-themselves. It is a pure negation of the ultimate existence of anything or, in Buddhist terminology, the “emptiness with respect to personal and phenomenal selves,” or “with respect to identity,” or “with respect to intrinsic nature,” or “with respect to essential substance,” or “with respect to self-existence established by intrinsic identity,” or “with respect to ultimate truth-status,” etc. Thus emptiness is a concept descriptive of the ultimate reality through its pure negation of whatever may be supposed to be ultimately real. It is an absence, hence not existent in itself. It is synonymous therefore with “infinity,” “absolute,” etc.—themselves all negative terms, i.e., formed etymologically from a positive concept by adding a negative prefix (in + finite = not finite; ab + solute = not compounded, etc.). But, since our verbally conditioned mental functions are habituated to the connection of word and thing, we tend to hypostatize a “void,” analogous to “outer space,” a “vacuum,” etc., which we either shrink from as a nihilistic nothingness or become attached to as a liberative nothingness; this great mistake can be cured only by realizing the meaning of the “emptiness of emptiness,” which brings us to the tolerance of inconceivability (see “tolerance”). 
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Fourth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.|Fourth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Seventeenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Seventeenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Seventeenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Sixteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.|Sixteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ཆེན-པོ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Fifth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.|Fifth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Fourteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.|Fourteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-བཅུ-བཞི	 These comprise the first fourteen of the eighteen aspects of emptiness, which have been enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-212. See Lamotte: The Treatise on the Great Virtue of Wisdom, IV: 1670.|These comprise the first fourteen of the eighteen aspects of emptiness, which have been enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-212. See Lamotte: The Treatise on the Great Virtue of Wisdom, IV: 1670. 
མཐའ-ལས-འདས-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Ninth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.|Ninth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
དོན-དམ-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Sixth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Sixth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Sixth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
འདུས-མ-བྱས-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Eighth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Eighth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Eighth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ནང-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 First of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| First of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |First of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ཕྱི-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Second of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Second of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Second of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
རང-བཞིན-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Twelfth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Twelfth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Twelfth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
རང-གི-མཚན-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ	 Thirteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.\nemptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics\nempty of intrinsic defining characteristics| Thirteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.\nemptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics\nempty of intrinsic defining characteristics |Thirteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.\nemptiness of all intrinsic defining characteristics\nempty of intrinsic defining characteristics 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པའི-སྒོ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 First of the three gateways to liberation.\nemptiness that is a gateway to liberation| First of the three gateways to liberation.\nemptiness that is a gateway to liberation |First of the three gateways to liberation.\nemptiness that is a gateway to liberation 
རྣམ-པ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-མཆོག-དང-ལྡན-པའི-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 A term which, in the commentaries of the third turning of the doctrinal wheel, is interpreted to mean that consummate buddha attributes are extraneously empty of all imaginary and dependent attributes.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-982).|A term which, in the commentaries of the third turning of the doctrinal wheel, is interpreted to mean that consummate buddha attributes are extraneously empty of all imaginary and dependent attributes.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-982). 
ཕྱི-ནང-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Third of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Third of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Third of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པའི-ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Eighteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.| Eighteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. |Eighteenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
ཐོག-མ-དང-ཐ-མ-མེད-པ-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 Tenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness.|Tenth of the eighteen aspects of emptiness. 
བདག-དང-བདག-གིས-སྟོང-པ	 empty of notions of “I” and “mine.”\nempty of notions of “I” and “mine,”\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine.’\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’| empty of notions of “I” and “mine.”\nempty of notions of “I” and “mine,”\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine.’\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ |empty of notions of “I” and “mine.”\nempty of notions of “I” and “mine,”\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine.’\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’\nempty of notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ 
རྗེས-སུ-སྐྱེས-པ	This term appears in reference to Su­bhūti who is considered to be an “emulator” of Lord Buddha, in the sense that he appears to imitate him. This is, of course, not to be understood in the sense of rivalry or competition.\nemulate\nemulator
རྣམ-པ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-མཆོག-དང-ལྡན-པ	Name of the ninety-second meditative stability.
རྣམ-གྲངས-མཐའ-ཡས-ལྡན	 A world system.|A world system. 
མཚན-དང-ལྡན-པ	Seventy-eighth of the eighty minor marks.
སྙིང-པོ-དང-ལྡན-པ	Name of the 100th meditative stability.
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག-ཡོད-པ	 Name of the seventy-fifth meditative stability.|Name of the seventy-fifth meditative stability. 
མི-མཇེད-འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས	 The human world of “patient endurance,” according to traditional Indian cosmology, comprising four continents. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1116.|The human world of “patient endurance,” according to traditional Indian cosmology, comprising four continents. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1116. 
མཚན-མ-ལ-སྤྱོད	 Also translated here as “engage with mental images.”\nengaging with signs|Also translated here as “engage with signs.”\nengaging with mental images 
གཡོ-བ-མེད-ཅིང-གནས-པ-མེད-ལ-དགའ-བ	 Name of the 107th meditative stability.| Name of the 107th meditative stability. |Name of the 107th meditative stability. 
ཡོན-ཏན	Enlightened attributes include specific qualities of buddha body, speech, and mind, such as the thirty-two major and eighty minor marks, the sixty intonations of Brahmā-like voice, and the attributes of compassion, omniscience, and power.
རིགས	In the context‌ of the present text, this term denotes the heritage or family of bodhisattvas following the Great Vehicle.\nWhen refering a son or daughter enlightened heritage, the expressions kula­putra ({rigs kyi bu}) and kula­duhitā ({rigs kyi bu mo}) are terms of endearment with which a teacher may address his or her own students. See the definition in Zhang Yisun et al (1975): 2686. In the context‌ of the present sūtra, these terms therefore denote a male or female follower of the Great Vehicle, distinct from the adherents of the lesser vehicles. This may be suggested in the translation “children of enlightened heritage,” which other interpretative renderings, such as “son of a noble family” or “son of a good family,” would lack.
རིགས-ཀྱི-བུ	 A term of endearment, used by a teacher when addressing a male follower of the bodhisattva path.\nchild of the enlightened family| faithful man |A term of endearment, used by a teacher when addressing a male follower of the bodhisattva path.\nchild of the enlightened family 
བླ-ན-མེད-པ-ཡང-དག-པར-རྫོགས-པའི-བྱང-ཆུབ	 An enlightenment that is authentically complete. | unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment| unsurpassed and genuinely perfect enlightenment |An enlightenment that is authentically complete. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཆེན-པོ-རྣམ-པ-ལྔ	 The term “five degrees of enlightenment” is interpreted by Vi­mukti­sena (Sparham (2006 I): 145) to denote the results, such as entering the stream, that are mentioned in the paragraph that immediately follows the appearance of this term, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1402. See also the Extensive Exegesis of the Transcendent Perfection of Discriminative Awareness in One Hundred Thousand Lines, Twenty-five Thousand Lines, and Eighteen Thousand Lines (Śata­sahāsrikā­pañca­viṃśati­sāhasrikāṣṭā­daśa­sāhasrikā­prajnā­pāramitā­bṛhaṭṭīkā, TPD 55: 1040).\nAn alternative, though less likely, enumeration is given in A­saṅga’s Yogācāra­bhūmi, volume sha, 162a: (1) essence ({ngo bo nyid}), (2) power ({mthu}), (3) skillful means ({thabs}), (4) engagement ({'jug pa}), and (5) reversal ({ldog pa}). See Nordrang Orgyan (2003): 1158.|The term “five degrees of enlightenment” is interpreted by Vi­mukti­sena (Sparham (2006 I): 145) to denote the results, such as entering the stream, that are mentioned in the paragraph that immediately follows the appearance of this term, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1402. See also the Extensive Exegesis of the Transcendent Perfection of Discriminative Awareness in One Hundred Thousand Lines, Twenty-five Thousand Lines, and Eighteen Thousand Lines (Śata­sahāsrikā­pañca­viṃśati­sāhasrikāṣṭā­daśa­sāhasrikā­prajnā­pāramitā­bṛhaṭṭīkā, TPD 55: 1040).\nAn alternative, though less likely, enumeration is given in A­saṅga’s Yogācāra­bhūmi, volume sha, 162a: (1) essence ({ngo bo nyid}), (2) power ({mthu}), (3) skillful means ({thabs}), (4) engagement ({'jug pa}), and (5) reversal ({ldog pa}). See Nordrang Orgyan (2003): 1158. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-རྣམ-པ-ལྔ	 The term “five degrees of enlightenment” is interpreted by Vi­mukti­sena (Sparham (2006 I): 145) to denote the results, such as entering the stream, that are mentioned in the paragraph that immediately follows the appearance of this term, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1402. See also the Extensive Exegesis of the Transcendent Perfection of Discriminative Awareness in One Hundred Thousand Lines, Twenty-five Thousand Lines, and Eighteen Thousand Lines (Śata­sahāsrikā­pañca­viṃśati­sāhasrikāṣṭā­daśa­sāhasrikā­prajnā­pāramitā­bṛhaṭṭīkā, TPD 55: 1040).\nAn alternative, though less likely, enumeration is given in A­saṅga’s Yogācāra­bhūmi, volume sha, 162a: (1) essence ({ngo bo nyid}), (2) power ({mthu}), (3) skillful means ({thabs}), (4) engagement ({'jug pa}), and (5) reversal ({ldog pa}). See Nordrang Orgyan (2003): 1158.|The term “five degrees of enlightenment” is interpreted by Vi­mukti­sena (Sparham (2006 I): 145) to denote the results, such as entering the stream, that are mentioned in the paragraph that immediately follows the appearance of this term, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1402. See also the Extensive Exegesis of the Transcendent Perfection of Discriminative Awareness in One Hundred Thousand Lines, Twenty-five Thousand Lines, and Eighteen Thousand Lines (Śata­sahāsrikā­pañca­viṃśati­sāhasrikāṣṭā­daśa­sāhasrikā­prajnā­pāramitā­bṛhaṭṭīkā, TPD 55: 1040).\nAn alternative, though less likely, enumeration is given in A­saṅga’s Yogācāra­bhūmi, volume sha, 162a: (1) essence ({ngo bo nyid}), (2) power ({mthu}), (3) skillful means ({thabs}), (4) engagement ({'jug pa}), and (5) reversal ({ldog pa}). See Nordrang Orgyan (2003): 1158. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-སུ-བསྐྱེད-པ	 The setting of the mind on enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, which marks the onset of the bodhisattva path and culminates in the actual attainment of buddhahood, distinguishes the compassionate bodhisattva path from that of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who are both preoccupied with their own emancipation from cyclic existence. See Dayal (1932): 50–79, Williams (1989): 197–204, and Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 218–234.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8).\nset their mind on enlightenment\nsetting of their mind on enlightenment\nsettings of their mind on enlightenment| The setting of the mind on enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, which marks the onset of the bodhisattva path and culminates in the actual attainment of buddhahood, distinguishes the compassionate bodhisattva path from that of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who are both preoccupied with their own emancipation from cyclic existence. See Dayal (1932): 50–79, Williams (1989): 197–204, and Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 218–234.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8).\nset their mind on enlightenment\nsetting of their mind on enlightenment\nsettings of their mind on enlightenment |The setting of the mind on enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, which marks the onset of the bodhisattva path and culminates in the actual attainment of buddhahood, distinguishes the compassionate bodhisattva path from that of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who are both preoccupied with their own emancipation from cyclic existence. See Dayal (1932): 50–79, Williams (1989): 197–204, and Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 218–234.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8).\nset their mind on enlightenment\nsetting of their mind on enlightenment\nsettings of their mind on enlightenment 
སེམས-སུ-བསྐྱེད-པ	 The setting of the mind on enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, which marks the onset of the bodhisattva path and culminates in the actual attainment of buddhahood, distinguishes the compassionate bodhisattva path from that of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who are both preoccupied with their own emancipation from cyclic existence. See Dayal (1932): 50–79, Williams (1989): 197–204, and Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 218–234.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8).\nset their mind on enlightenment\nsetting of their mind on enlightenment\nsettings of their mind on enlightenment| The setting of the mind on enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, which marks the onset of the bodhisattva path and culminates in the actual attainment of buddhahood, distinguishes the compassionate bodhisattva path from that of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who are both preoccupied with their own emancipation from cyclic existence. See Dayal (1932): 50–79, Williams (1989): 197–204, and Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 218–234.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8).\nset their mind on enlightenment\nsetting of their mind on enlightenment\nsettings of their mind on enlightenment |The setting of the mind on enlightenment for the sake of all sentient beings, which marks the onset of the bodhisattva path and culminates in the actual attainment of buddhahood, distinguishes the compassionate bodhisattva path from that of the śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas who are both preoccupied with their own emancipation from cyclic existence. See Dayal (1932): 50–79, Williams (1989): 197–204, and Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 218–234.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8).\nset their mind on enlightenment\nsetting of their mind on enlightenment\nsettings of their mind on enlightenment 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཕྱོགས-ཀྱི-ཆོས-སུམ-བཅུ-རྩ-བདུན	 The Buddhist path as presented in the bodhisattva vehicle: the four close applications of mindfulness, the four perfect abandonments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven limbs of enlightenment, and the eightfold noble path.|The Buddhist path as presented in the bodhisattva vehicle: the four close applications of mindfulness, the four perfect abandonments, the four bases of miraculous power, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven limbs of enlightenment, and the eightfold noble path. 
རྒྱས-པ	 The rishi who is said to have divided the Vedas into four and to have compiled the epic, the Mahābhārata.| The rishi who is said to have divided the Vedas into four and to have compiled the epic, the Mahābhārata. |One of the four main types of enlightened activity. 
རྒྱུན-དུ-ཞུགས-པའི-འབྲས-བུ	 First of the four fruits attainable by śrāvakas, that of the first stage in progressing toward nirvāṇa.\nfruit of having entered the stream|First of the four fruits attainable by śrāvakas, that of the first stage in progressing toward nirvāṇa.\nfruit of having entered the stream 
དབང-བ	 One of the four main types of enlightened activity.|One of the four main types of enlightened activity. 
དངོས-པོ	See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-236.\nentities
དངོས-པོ-མེད-པ	 See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-236.\nnon-entities|See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-236.\nnon-entities 
གཞན-གྱི-དངོས-པོ	 This term denotes “anything other than the unconditioned expanse of reality” and so forth. Konow (1941), pp. 36–37, translates this term as “being-something-else.” Lamotte (op. cit. p. 1673) suggests “other existence.”\nextraneous entities|This term denotes “anything other than the unconditioned expanse of reality” and so forth. Konow (1941), pp. 36–37, translates this term as “being-something-else.” Lamotte (op. cit. p. 1673) suggests “other existence.”\nextraneous entities 
བརྡ-དང-སྒྲ-ལ-འཇུག-པ	Name of the eighty-seventh meditative stability.
ཚིག-བླ-དགས-ལ-འཇུག-ཅིང-ཕྱོགས-ལ-རྣམ-པར-ལྟ-བ	Names of the seventeenth and eighteenth meditative stabilities.
འདོད-པར-བྱ-བ	In the sense of enviable.
ཕྲག-དོག-རྡོ-རྗེ-མ	 Consort of Green ‌Acala.|Consort of Green ‌Acala. 
བསྐལ-པ	 According to the traditional Abhidharma understanding of cyclical time, a great eon (mahākalpa) is divided into eighty lesser or intervening eons. In the course of one great eon, the external universe and its sentient life takes form and later disappears. During the first twenty of the lesser eons, the universe is in the process of creation and expansion (vivartakalpa); during the next twenty it remains created; during the third twenty, it is in the process of destruction or contraction (samvartakalpa); and during the last quarter of the cycle, it remains in a state of destruction.|The Indian concept of an eon of millions of years, sometimes equivalent to the time when a world appears, exists, and disappears. There are also the intermediate eons during the existence of a world, and the longest, which is called asamkhyeya (literally, “incalculable,” even though the number of its years is calculated). 
སྐལ-པ-བཟང-པོ	 Our present eon in which over a thousand buddhas will appear. The meaning is “good” because of the number of buddhas that will appear. In the sūtra, it is usually called bhadraka.|Our present eon in which over a thousand buddhas will appear. The meaning is “good” because of the number of buddhas that will appear. In the sūtra, it is usually called bhadraka. 
མི-མཉམ-པ-དང-མཉམ-པ	 Name of the seventy-seventh meditative stability.|Name of the seventy-seventh meditative stability. 
བཏང-སྙོམས	 Fourth of the four immeasurable aspirations.|The antidote to attachment and aversion; a mental state free from bias toward sentient beings. 
དམིགས-པ-གཅོད-པ	 Name of the sixty-fourth meditative stability.|Name of the sixty-fourth meditative stability. 
འབྲུམ-བུ-མེ-དབལ	A bacterial infection of the skin, also called Ignis Sacer and St. Anthony’s Fire. The Tibetan means “fireflames.” Its worst form as described in the sūtra is “necrotizing fasciitis,” when the skin and flesh beneath blacken and die; it can lead quickly to death.
ངོ-བོ-ཉིད-མེད-པ-གསུམ	 These comprise the imaginary, dependent, and consummate essenceless natures, which are elaborated particularly in the discourses associated with the third turning of the doctrinal wheel.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-4).|These comprise the imaginary, dependent, and consummate essenceless natures, which are elaborated particularly in the discourses associated with the third turning of the doctrinal wheel.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-4). 
གཏན-ལ-ཕབ-པ-བསྟན-པའི-སྡེ	 Eleventh of the twelve branches of the scriptures.|Eleventh of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
ཡི-གེ-མཉམ-པར-འགོད-པ	 Name of the sixty-second meditative stability.| Name of the sixty-second meditative stability. |Name of the sixty-second meditative stability. 
བཀོད-པ-བསྒྲུབ-པ	Name of the twenty-eighth meditative stability.
འོད-ཟེར-རྟག-པ	 A world system.|A world system. 
རྟག-པའི-ལྟ-བ	The first of two extreme views which keep one deluded with regard to reality. Eternalism is the view that clings to some eternal, truly existent essence called ‘self,’ based on the experience of a collection of, in fact, transitory phenomena.
རྟག-པ-དང-ཆད-པའི-མཐའ-གཉིས	 The two extreme views to be avoided when seeking an insight into emptiness.| The two extreme views to be avoided when seeking an insight into emptiness. |The two extreme views to be avoided when seeking an insight into emptiness. 
ངེས-པའི-ཚིག	Etymology here implies the unhindered discernment of the primary and derivative definitions of names and words. It's also the third of the four unhindered discernments, see “unhindered discernment of etymology.”
རྟག-ཏུ-མྱོས	 One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Meru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “constantly intoxicated or insane” and because of their condition they are unable to follow the path to enlightenment.| One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Meru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “constantly intoxicated or insane” and because of their condition they are unable to follow the path to enlightenment. |Name of a class of gods on the slopes of Sumeru. 
རྟག-རེས-འཁོར	An acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
རིན-ཆེན-མཆོག	 Bodhisattva of the northwest. | Name of a bodhisattva god whose wish sets off the teaching of the sūtra.| Name of a bodhisattva god whose wish sets off the teaching of the sūtra. |Bodhisattva of the northwest. 
འབྲུམ-ཕྲན	An illness such as measles or rubella, considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མངོན-པའི-ང-རྒྱལ	 A conceited, false sense of attainment. One of seven types of pride related to the spiritual path.|A conceited, false sense of attainment. One of seven types of pride related to the spiritual path. 
འདུན-པའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-སྤང-བའི-འདུ-བྱེད-དང-ལྡན-པའི-རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	 First of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of resolution with the formative force of exertion| First of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of resolution with the formative force of exertion |First of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of resolution with the formative force of exertion 
དཔྱོད-པའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-སྤང-བའི-འདུ-བྱེད-དང-ལྡན-པའི-རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	 Fourth of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of scrutiny with the formative force of exertion| Fourth of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of scrutiny with the formative force of exertion |Fourth of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of scrutiny with the formative force of exertion 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཀྱི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-སྤང-བའི-འདུ-བྱེད-དང-ལྡན-པའི-རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	 Second of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion| Second of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion |Second of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion 
སེམས-ཀྱི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-སྤང-བའི-འདུ-བྱེད-དང-ལྡན-པའི-རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ	 Third of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of mind with the formative force of exertion| Third of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of mind with the formative force of exertion |Third of the four supports for miraculous abilities.\nsupport for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of mind with the formative force of exertion 
དབྱུང-བ	 Though classed as one of the five disciplinary acts imposed on a monk, it is the act used to restore full status to a monk upon his satisfactory completion of a disciplinary act like demotion.|A skill taught to brahmins and kings that may relate to finance or grammar.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-142. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པ	 As an adjective for a sūtra it refers to one of the twelve classes of sūtra teaching, and refers to sūtras of great length. | As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means an extensive teaching on a subject.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”| As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means an extensive teaching on a subject.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” |As an adjective for a sūtra it refers to one of the twelve classes of sūtra teaching, and refers to sūtras of great length. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པའི-མདོ-སྡེ	 Twelfth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.|Twelfth of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
ཕ-རོལ-གྱི-སེམས-ཤེས-པ-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Fourth of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of the minds of others| Fourth of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of the minds of others |Fourth of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of the minds of others 
བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པ-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 First of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of miraculous activities| First of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of miraculous activities |First of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of miraculous activities 
ལྷའི-རྣ-བ-ཤེས-པ-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Third of the six extrasensory powers.| Third of the six extrasensory powers. |Third of the six extrasensory powers. 
ལྷའི-མིག-ཤེས-པ-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Second of the six extrasensory powers.| Second of the six extrasensory powers. |Second of the six extrasensory powers. 
སྔོན-གྱི-གནས-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ-ཤེས-པ-མངོན-སུམ-དུ-བྱ-བ-ཤེས-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Fifth of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives| Fifth of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives |Fifth of the six extrasensory powers.\nextrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives 
ཤའི-མིག	First of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1114.
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-མིག	 Third of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1118.|Third of the five eyes. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1118. 
སྤྱན-ཡངས-པ	Fifty-third of the eighty minor marks.
ལྟ-བ-དྲུག-ཅུ-རྩ-གཉིས	 A typology of erroneous beliefs about the nature of reality, often grouped into views of eternalism, nihilism, and their combinations.|A typology of erroneous beliefs about the nature of reality, often grouped into views of eternalism, nihilism, and their combinations. 
ཞལ-ཟླ-བ-ལྟ-བུ	 Thirty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.\nface is like the full moon| Thirty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.\nface is like the full moon |Thirty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.\nface is like the full moon 
མངོན-དུ-གྱུར-པ	The sixth bodhisattva level.
དབང-པོ-ལྔ	 Faith, dilligence, mindfulness, absorption, and knowledge. | The five faculties, as found listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-162, comprise (1) the faculty of faith, (2) the faculty of perseverance, (3) the faculty of recollection, (4) the faculty of meditative stability, and (5) the faculty of wisdom. | The five powers, or faculties, are those of (1) faith; (2) perseverence; (3) mindfulness; (4) meditative absorption or samādhi; and (5) wisdom or prajñā.| These are called “faculties” (indriya) by analogy, as they are considered as capacities to be developed: the spiritual faculties for faith (śraddhā), effort (vīrya), mindfulness (smṛti), concentration (samādhi), and wisdom (prajña). These are included in the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment. |Faith, dilligence, mindfulness, absorption, and knowledge. 
དབང-པོ-རྣམས	Cognitive faculties; the five senses plus mental faculty.
དབང-པོ-ལྔའི-མིང-ལ	 Faith, diligence, recollection, samādhi, and wisdom (śraddhā, vīrya, smṛti, samādhi, prajñā).|Faith, diligence, recollection, samādhi, and wisdom (śraddhā, vīrya, smṛti, samādhi, prajñā). 
སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ཀྱི-སྒོ-བཟང-བ-དག	 Lit. “their gates to the sense fields are excellent;” thirty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\n[sense faculties]—the ‘gates to the sense fields’—are excellent| Lit. “their gates to the sense fields are excellent;” thirty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\n[sense faculties]—the ‘gates to the sense fields’—are excellent |Lit. “their gates to the sense fields are excellent;” thirty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\n[sense faculties]—the ‘gates to the sense fields’—are excellent 
ཀུན-ཤེས-པ-དང-ལྡན-པའི-དབང-པོ	 Third of the three faculties.| Third of the three faculties. |Third of the three faculties. 
ཀུན-ཤེས-པའི-དབང-པོ	 Second of the three faculties.| Second of the three faculties. |Second of the three faculties. 
མི-ཤེས-པ-ཀུན-ཤེས-པར-བྱེད-པའི-དབང-པོ	 First of the three faculties.| First of the three faculties. |First of the three faculties. 
ཡིད	 The faculty that perceives mental phenomena.|The faculty that perceives mental phenomena. 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-གྱི-དབང-པོ	 Fourth of the five faculties.| Fourth of the five faculties. |Fourth of the five faculties. 
དད-པའི-དབང-པོ	 First of the five faculties.|First of the five faculties. 
དྲན-པའི-དབང-པོ	 Third of the five faculties.\nfaculty of mindfulness| Third of the five faculties.\nfaculty of mindfulness |Third of the five faculties.\nfaculty of mindfulness 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཀྱི-དབང-པོ	 Second of the five faculties.|Second of the five faculties. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-དབང-པོ	 Fifth of the five faculties.| Fifth of the five faculties. |Fifth of the five faculties. 
ཡིད-ཀྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Sixth of the twelve sense fields.| Sixth of the twelve sense fields. |Sixth of the twelve sense fields. 
བྷརཨིང-ག-རཱ-ཛ	Eclipta prostrata.
ལྟ-བའི-རྣམ-པ-དྲུག-ཅུ-རྩ-གཉིས	 The sixty-two false views, as enumerated in the Sūtra of the Net of Brahmā (Bodhi (1978)), comprise eighteen speculations concerning the past, based on theories of eternalism, partial eternalism, extensionism, endless equivocation, and fortuitous origination, as well as forty-four speculations concerning the future, based on percipient immortality, non-percipient immortality, neither percipient nor non-percipient immortality, annihilationism, and the immediate attainment of nirvāṇa in the present life.\nsixty-two aspects of false view| The sixty-two false views, as enumerated in the Sūtra of the Net of Brahmā (Bodhi (1978)), comprise eighteen speculations concerning the past, based on theories of eternalism, partial eternalism, extensionism, endless equivocation, and fortuitous origination, as well as forty-four speculations concerning the future, based on percipient immortality, non-percipient immortality, neither percipient nor non-percipient immortality, annihilationism, and the immediate attainment of nirvāṇa in the present life.\nsixty-two aspects of false view |The sixty-two false views, as enumerated in the Sūtra of the Net of Brahmā (Bodhi (1978)), comprise eighteen speculations concerning the past, based on theories of eternalism, partial eternalism, extensionism, endless equivocation, and fortuitous origination, as well as forty-four speculations concerning the future, based on percipient immortality, non-percipient immortality, neither percipient nor non-percipient immortality, annihilationism, and the immediate attainment of nirvāṇa in the present life.\nsixty-two aspects of false view 
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པའི-རིགས	 In the CMT system, this is the family of the buddha Akṣobhya, one of the five buddhas.| In the CMT system, this is the family of the buddha Akṣobhya, one of the five buddhas. | This term arises from a classification of beings into different groups (lineages) according to their destinies: disciple lineage, solitary buddha lineage, buddha lineage, etc. The Mādhyamika school, and the sūtras that are its foundation, maintains that all living beings belong to the buddha lineage, that disciple vehicle nirvāṇa is not a final destiny, and that arhats must eventually enter the Mahāyāna path. Mañjuśrī carries this idea to the extreme, finding the tathāgata lineage everywhere, in all mundane things. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-21, and Lamotte, Appendice, Note VII.\n‘family of the tathāgatas’ |This term arises from a classification of beings into different groups (lineages) according to their destinies: disciple lineage, solitary buddha lineage, buddha lineage, etc. The Mādhyamika school, and the sūtras that are its foundation, maintains that all living beings belong to the buddha lineage, that disciple vehicle nirvāṇa is not a final destiny, and that arhats must eventually enter the Mahāyāna path. Mañjuśrī carries this idea to the extreme, finding the tathāgata lineage everywhere, in all mundane things. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-21, and Lamotte, Appendice, Note VII.\n‘family of the tathāgatas’ 
གསོ-སྦྱོང	 A group of eight vows taken for one day on certain days of the month to emphasize purity. They include the traditional five “lay precepts,” plus the vows not to sit on high cushions or thrones, not to eat at inappropriate times, not to wear adornments, and not to engage in or listen to song and dance. | A ritual observance involving fasting. | A twice monthly ceremony performed by monks, nuns, and novices in which the ordained confess and remedy transgressions of their vows, thereby purifying and restoring the vows.| A twice monthly ceremony performed by monks, nuns, and novices in which the ordained confess and remedy transgressions of their vows, thereby purifying and restoring the vows. | The fortnightly ceremony during which ordained monks and nuns gather to recite the Prātimokṣa vows and confess faults and breaches. The term is also sometimes used in reference to the taking of eight vows by a layperson for just one day, a full-moon or new-moon day. |A ritual observance involving fasting. 
དྲི-ཟའི-གྲོང-ཁྱེར	 See “gandharva.”| See “gandharva.” |A particular kind of mirage in which buildings, mountains, and so on can appear in the sky above the horizon. In India, called the “city of gandharvas,” as it was believed to be a glimpse of the residences of these divine beings. 
ངལ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཉེས-བྱས	One of five types of transgressions a monk can incur. These 112 types of fault are the lightest type of transgression. There are expunged through resolving to refrain from them in the future.
རྒྱལ-པོས-བཀྲབས-པ	Such as a courtier. One of the classes of people barred from joining the renunciate order.
མི-འཇིགས-པ-བཞི	 Fearlessness in declaring that one has (1) awakened, (2) ceased all illusions, (3) taught the obstacles to awakening, and (4) shown the way to liberation.| Fearlessness in declaring that one has (1) awakened, (2) ceased all illusions, (3) taught the obstacles to awakening, and (4) shown the way to liberation. | The four assurances are proclaimed by the tathāgatas, and can be found listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-248 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2374 as: (1) “I claim to have attained genuinely perfect buddhahood;” (2) “I claim I am one whose contaminants have ceased;” (3) “I claim to have explained those things which cause obstacles;” (4) “I claim to have explained the path through which suffering will genuinely cease.” (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-252.)\nThese four are generally known by other names, i.e., the first is the “assurance in the knowledge of all things” (sarva­dharmābhi­sambodhi­vaiśarādya, {chos thams cad mkhyen pa la mi 'jigs pa}), which the Buddha achieves for his own benefit; the second is the “assurance in the knowledge of the cessation of all contaminants” (sarvāśravakṣaya­jñāna­vaiśarādya, {zag pa zad pa thams cad mkhyen pa la mi 'jigs pa}), which the Buddha achieves for his own benefit; the third is the “assurance to declare that phenomena that obstruct the path will not engender any further negative outcomes” (an­antarāyika­dharmān­anyathātva­viniścita­vyākaraṇa­vaiśarādya, {bar du gcod pa'i chos rnams gzhan du mi 'gyur bar nges pa'i lung bstan pa la mi 'jigs pa}), which the Buddha achieves for others’ benefit; and the fourth is the “assurance that the path of renunciation through which all excellent attributes are to be obtained has been just so realized” (sarva­sampad­adhigamāya nairāṇika­pratipat­tathātva­vaiśarādya, {bar du gcod pa'i chos rnams gzhan du mi 'gyur bar nges pa'i lung bstan pa la mi 'jigs pa}), which the Buddha achieves for others’ benefit. |Fearlessness in declaring that one has (1) awakened, (2) ceased all illusions, (3) taught the obstacles to awakening, and (4) shown the way to liberation. 
ལྔ-སྟོན	 Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.| Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. |Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
བརྒྱད-སྟོན	 Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.| Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. |Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
བཅུ-བཞི-སྟོན	 Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.| Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. |Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
ཉ-སྟོན	 Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.| Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. |Feasts falling on these days of the lunar month are considered an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
ཚོར-བ	 Seventh of the twelve links of dependent origination. Also translated here as “feelings.” | Seventh of the twelve links of dependent origination. Also translated here as “sensation.” | The second of the five skandhas: nonconceptual pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral sensations as a result of sensory experiences.| see “aggregates” |The second of the five aggregates. 
སྲོག-གི-མཐའ-པའི-ཚོར-བ	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-662.| See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-662. |See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-662. 
ཞབས-ཤིན-ཏུ-གནས-པ-དང-ལྡན-པ	First of the thirty-two major marks.\nfeet that are well positioned
མུ-ཁྱུད-ཁོར-ཡུག-དང-ལྡན-པ	 Second of the thirty-two major marks.\nfeet that are marked with the motif of the wheel| Second of the thirty-two major marks.\nfeet that are marked with the motif of the wheel |Second of the thirty-two major marks.\nfeet that are marked with the motif of the wheel 
སླས	Female attendants who normally assisted the wife of a wealthy householder.
འཁྱུད-ནས-ལྡང-བའི-མ-ནིང	 “The Chapter on Going Forth” defines this as, “One who becomes erect if embraced by another.” Though its exact meaning is not clear, fetishism seems to be implied. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order.|“The Chapter on Going Forth” defines this as, “One who becomes erect if embraced by another.” Though its exact meaning is not clear, fetishism seems to be implied. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order. 
ཉིན-གཅིག-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
བླག-ཤ	 Ficus infectoria. Full English name: White fruited wavy-leaf fig tree.| Ficus infectoria. Full English name: White fruited wavy-leaf fig tree. |Ficus infectoria. Full English name: White fruited wavy-leaf fig tree. 
ཨུ-དུམ-བཱ-རའི-མེ-ཏོག	 A simile for rarity, as fig trees do not have discernible blossoms. In Tibet the udumbara (Ficus glomerata), being unknown, became portrayed as a gigantic lotuslike flower. The Chinese adds the adjective “rare” and, like the Tibetan, simply transliterates udumbara.|A simile for rarity, as fig trees do not have discernible blossoms. In Tibet the udumbara (Ficus glomerata), being unknown, became portrayed as a gigantic lotuslike flower. The Chinese adds the adjective “rare” and, like the Tibetan, simply transliterates udumbara. 
ཡོངས-སུ-མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདས-པ	 A more emphatic term for nirvāṇa, when it is used in reference to the apparent passing away of a physical body of a buddha. | Nirvāṇa, the state beyond sorrow, denotes the ultimate attainment of buddhahood, the permanent cessation of all suffering and the afflicted mental states which cause and perpetuate suffering, along with all misapprehension with regard to the nature of emptiness. As such, it is the antithesis of cyclic existence. Three types of nirvāṇa are identified: (1) the residual nirvāṇa where the person is still dependent on conditioned psycho-physical aggregates, (2) the non-residual nirvāṇa where the aggregates have also been consumed within emptiness, and (3) the non-abiding nirvāṇa transcending the extremes of phenomenal existence and quiescence. Final nirvāṇa implies the non-residual attainment. | The name given to the display of the Buddha’s passing away in Kuśinagara.| The name given to the display of the Buddha’s passing away in Kuśinagara. |Nirvāṇa, the state beyond sorrow, denotes the ultimate attainment of buddhahood, the permanent cessation of all suffering and the afflicted mental states which cause and perpetuate suffering, along with all misapprehension with regard to the nature of emptiness. As such, it is the antithesis of cyclic existence. Three types of nirvāṇa are identified: (1) the residual nirvāṇa where the person is still dependent on conditioned psycho-physical aggregates, (2) the non-residual nirvāṇa where the aggregates have also been consumed within emptiness, and (3) the non-abiding nirvāṇa transcending the extremes of phenomenal existence and quiescence. Final nirvāṇa implies the non-residual attainment. 
ཡང-དག-པའི-མཐའ	 A synonym for ultimate reality, emptiness, dharmadhātu, and so forth—as either an ontological reality or a state of being—this compound is typically parsed as the “limit” or “frontier” (koṭi) of “reality” (bhūta), which is intended metaphorically, as it is consistently described, in a play on words, as “without limit” (akoṭi) or “infinite” (atyanta). This compound might also be parsed as the “final” or “true” (bhūta) “conclusion” or “goal” (koṭi), although the majority of cases and the Indian Buddhist commentarial tradition tend to support the former interpretation. | A synonym for ultimate reality. | A synonym of the ultimate reality. In the Mahāyāna sūtras, it has a somewhat negative flavor, connoting the Hinayāna concept of a static nirvāṇa. Sthiramati glosses the term as follows: “ ‘Reality’ means undistorted truth. ‘Limit’ means the extreme beyond which there is nothing to be known by anyone” (bhūtaṃ satyam aviparītamityarthaḥ / koṭiḥ paryanto yataḥ pareṇa-anyajjñeyaṃ nāsti…/).| A synonym of the ultimate reality. In the Mahāyāna sūtras, it has a somewhat negative flavor, connoting the Hinayāna concept of a static nirvāṇa. Sthiramati glosses the term as follows: “ ‘Reality’ means undistorted truth. ‘Limit’ means the extreme beyond which there is nothing to be known by anyone” (bhūtaṃ satyam aviparītamityarthaḥ / koṭiḥ paryanto yataḥ pareṇa-anyajjñeyaṃ nāsti…/). | The ultimate experience of reality, a close synonym of nirvāṇa. | The ultimate state that can be experienced in the realization of reality, and a near-synonym of nirvāṇa; sometimes also translated as “the reality limit” in contexts describing a partial nirvāṇa that needs to be transcended. | This term has three meanings: (1) a synonym for the ultimate nature, (2) the experience of the ultimate nature, and (3) the quiescent state of a worthy one (arhat) to be avoided by bodhisattvas. |A synonym for ultimate reality. 
ཡུལ-ཀ-ཤིའི-རས-ཕྲན	 An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.|An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
ཀླུ-འདབ-བཟངས-ཀྱི-གདོན	 The Sanskrit term suparṇī in nāga­suparṇī­graha, translated by the Tibetan term {'dab bzang}, literally means “fine-winged” or “beautiful-leaved.” While this can be an epithet for the mythical garuḍa bird, here it seems to simply describe a general characteristic of the nāga.| The Sanskrit term suparṇī in nāga­suparṇī­graha, translated by the Tibetan term {'dab bzang}, literally means “fine-winged” or “beautiful-leaved.” While this can be an epithet for the mythical garuḍa bird, here it seems to simply describe a general characteristic of the nāga. |The Sanskrit term suparṇī in nāga­suparṇī­graha, translated by the Tibetan term {'dab bzang}, literally means “fine-winged” or “beautiful-leaved.” While this can be an epithet for the mythical garuḍa bird, here it seems to simply describe a general characteristic of the nāga. 
སོར-མོ-རྒྱས-པ	Ninth of the eighty minor marks.
སོར-མོ-རྣམས-བྱིན-གྱིས-ཕྲ-བ	Eleventh of the eighty minor marks.
སྲིན-བུ-མེ-ཁྱེར	fireflies
རེག-པར-སྤྱོད-པ	See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1105.
མཚམས-མེད-ལྔ	 Lit. “sins of immediate retribution [after death].” These five, all of which cause immediate rebirth in hell, are killing one’s father, killing one’s mother, killing an arhat, breaking up the saṅgha, and causing, with evil intent, the Tathāgata to bleed. | The five extremely negative actions which, once those who have committed them die, result in their going immediately to the hells without experiencing the intermediate state. They are killing an arhat, killing one’s mother, killing one’s father, creating schism in the Saṅgha, and maliciously drawing blood from a tathāgata’s body. | The “five inexpiable crimes,” or “crimes with immediate retribution” because they result in immediate rebirth in the hells without any intermediate state, are regarded as the most severe and consequently the most difficult negative actions to overcome by reparation. They are matricide ({ma gsod pa}), killing an arhat ({dgra bcom pa gsod pa}), patricide ({pha gsod pa}), creating a schism in the monastic community ({dge 'dun gyi dbyen byas pa}), and intentionally wounding a buddha ({de bzhin gshegs pa'i sku la ngan sems kyis khrag 'byin pa}).|The five extremely negative actions which, once those who have committed them die, result in their going immediately to the hells without experiencing the intermediate state. They are killing an arhat, killing one’s mother, killing one’s father, creating schism in the Saṅgha, and maliciously drawing blood from a tathāgata’s body. 
ཕུང-པོ-ལྔ	 The five “aggregates” comprising a living being. | The ordinary mind-body complex is termed the “five psycho-physical aggregates,” which comprise physical forms, feelings, perceptions, formative predispositions, and consciousness.\nFor a detailed exposition of the five psycho-physical aggregates in accord with A­saṅga’s Abhi­dharma­samuccaya, see Jamgon Kongtrul, TOK Book 6, Pt. 2: 477–531.|Form, feeling, perception, formation and consciousness. 
སངས-རྒྱས-ལྔ	The five, in the CMT system, are Akṣobhya (in the centre), Vairocana (in the east), Ratnasambhava (in the south), Amitābha (in the west), and Amoghasiddhi (in the north).
འགྲོ-བ-ལྔ	These comprise gods and humans of the higher realms within cyclic existence, along with animals, anguished spirits, and the denizens of the hells, whose abodes are identified with the lower realms.
སྙིགས-མ-ལྔ	 Five particular aspects of life which indicate the degenerate nature of a given age. They are the impurities of views, of afflictions, of sentient beings, of life, and of time.|The five degenerations are: (1) degeneration of life span, (2) degeneration of views, (3) degeneration of the afflictions (4) degeneration of beings, and (5) the degeneration of the era. 
མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ-ལྔ	 There are five supernatural faculties resulting from meditative concentration: divine sight, divine hearing, knowing others’ minds, recollecting past lives, and the ability to perform miracles.| There are five supernatural faculties resulting from meditative concentration: divine sight, divine hearing, knowing others’ minds, recollecting past lives, and the ability to perform miracles. |Divine sight, divine hearing, the ability to know past and future lives, the ability to know the minds of others, and the ability to produce miracles. 
མངོན-ཤེས-ལྔ	 They comprise (1) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of [miraculous] activities, (2) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairvoyance, (3) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairaudience, (4) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of other minds, and (5) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives.\n(See also notes http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-127 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-267).|They comprise (1) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of [miraculous] activities, (2) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairvoyance, (3) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairaudience, (4) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of other minds, and (5) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives.\n(See also notes http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-127 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-267). 
མིག-ལྔ	These comprise (1) the eye of flesh, (2) the eye of divine clairvoyance, (3) the eye of wisdom, (4) the eye of the sacred doctrine, and (5) the eye of the buddhas. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-268 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1113.
རྣམ-པར-རྟོག-པ-ལྔ	The five false imaginations are enumerated in The Extensive Exegesis of the Transcendent Perfection of Discriminative Awareness in One Hundred Thousand Lines, Twenty-five Thousand Lines, and Eighteen Thousand Lines (Śata­sahāsrikā­pañca­viṃśati­sāhasrikā-ṣṭādaśa­sāhasrikā­prajnā­pāramitā­bṛhaṭ­ṭīkā, KPD 55: 1217). Therein, the five false imaginations which may confront reversible bodhisattvas are (1) wondering whether they are engaged in the emptiness of the transcendent perfection of wisdom and the transcendent perfection of wisdom ({ci shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa'i stong pa nyid/ shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa la spyod dam}), (2) wondering whether they are exclusively engaged in something other than the transcendent perfection of wisdom ({ci shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa las 'ba' zhig spyod dam}), (3) wondering whether they are engaged in the transcendent perfection of wisdom ({'on te shes rab kyi pha rol tu phyin pa la spyod dam}), (4) wondering whether they are engaged in emptiness ({'on te stong pa nyid spyod dam}), or (5) wondering whether they are engaged in something other than emptiness ({'on te stong pa nyid las gzhan pa zhig spyod dam}).
གོང-མའི-ཆ-མཐུན-གྱི-ཀུན-སྦྱོར-ལྔ	 As described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1121, they comprise attachment to the world system of form, attachment to the world system of formlessness, fundamental ignorance, pride, and mental agitation. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1122.\nfive fetters|As described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1121, they comprise attachment to the world system of form, attachment to the world system of formlessness, fundamental ignorance, pride, and mental agitation. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1122.\nfive fetters 
འོག-མའི-ཆ-དང-འཐུན-པའི-ཀུན-ཏུ-སྦྱོར-བ-ལྔ	 The five fetters associated with the lower realms comprise desire, hatred, inertia due to wrong views, attachment to moral and ascetic supremacy, and hesitation. See Zhang Yisun et al (1985): 2529.|The five fetters associated with the lower realms comprise desire, hatred, inertia due to wrong views, attachment to moral and ascetic supremacy, and hesitation. See Zhang Yisun et al (1985): 2529. 
སྒྲིབ-པ-ལྔ	 A set of mental factors that hinder discipline, concentration, and insight. | Longing for desires (kāmacchanda), malice (vyāpāda), sloth and torpor (styānamiddha), excitement and remorse (auddhatya­kaukṛtya) and doubt (vicikitsā).| The five obscurations, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2531, comprise longing for sensual pleasure, agitation and regret, harmful intention, dullness and sleepiness, and hesitation. See also Kimura IV: 182. | These are five mental impediments that hinder meditation: impediments of desire (kāmacchanda), malice (vyāpāda), depression and sloth (styānamiddha), wildness and excitement (auddhatya­kaukṛtya), and doubt, or perplexity (vicikitsa). |Longing for desires (kāmacchanda), malice (vyāpāda), sloth and torpor (styānamiddha), excitement and remorse (auddhatya­kaukṛtya) and doubt (vicikitsā). 
ཟས-སྣ-ལྔ	The “five kinds of [impure] food” are described in the ṭīka (F.80.b.) as “meat, anything mixed with garlic, beer, fish, and so forth.”
སྡིག-པའི-ལས-ལྔ	The five negative actions comprise killing, stealing, lying, sexual misconduct, and intoxication. A less likely interpretation would equate this enumeration with the {sdig to las lnga}, which are listed in Kalyāṇamitra’s Vinaya­vastu­ṭīkā (Toh 4113, ’dul ba, tsu, 196b) as slaying a brahman, slaying a cow, stealing gold, dallying with the wife of a spiritual teacher, and drinking alcohol. See Nordrang Orgyan (2008): 1112.
བའི-རྣམ-པ-ལྔ	Milk, curds, butter, urine and dung.
རྒྱལ-པོ-མདོ-ལྔ	(1) Bhadra­caryā­praṇidhāna (bzang spyod smon lam, in chapter 44 of the Avataṃsaka); for aspiration ({smon lam}), and described as vast ({rgya chen}). (2) Vajra­vidāraṇā­dhāraṇī (rdo rje rnam ’joms, Toh 750); for ablution ({khrus}). (3) Prajñā­pāramitā­hṛdaya (shes rab snying po, Toh 21 and 531); for the view ({lta ba}), and described as profound ({zab mo}). (4) Atyaya­jñāna (’da’ ka ye shes, Toh 122); for cultivation ({sgom pa}) and described as of definitive meaning (nges don). (5) bya ba ltung bshags (part of Vinaya­viniścayopāli­paripṛcchā, Toh 68); for purification of karmic obscurations ({las sgrib dag pa}).
འབུམ-སྡེ-ལྔ	(1) The long Prajñā­pāramitā (Toh 8), which contains 100,000 ślokas; (2) the Mahā­pari­nirvāṇa (Toh 119-120), which contains 100,000 testaments given by the Buddha at the time of his pari­nirvāṇa; (3) the Ratna­kūṭa (Toh 45-93), which contains 100,000 distinct names of the Buddha; (4) the Avataṃsaka (Toh 44), which contains 100,000 aspirations; and (5) the Laṅkāvatāra (Toh 107-108), which contains 100,000 discourses that are ways of subjugating the rākṣasas. These five sets of 100,000 features are also said to correspond to the Buddha’s body, speech, mind, qualities, and activities, respectively.
འབུམ-ཆེན-སྡེ-ལྔ	(1) The long Prajñā­pāramitā (Toh 8), which contains 100,000 ślokas; (2) the Mahā­pari­nirvāṇa (Toh 119-120), which contains 100,000 testaments given by the Buddha at the time of his pari­nirvāṇa; (3) the Ratna­kūṭa (Toh 45-93), which contains 100,000 distinct names of the Buddha; (4) the Avataṃsaka (Toh 44), which contains 100,000 aspirations; and (5) the Laṅkāvatāra (Toh 107-108), which contains 100,000 discourses that are ways of subjugating the rākṣasas. These five sets of 100,000 features are also said to correspond to the Buddha’s body, speech, mind, qualities, and activities, respectively.
བ-ཡི-རྣམ-ལྔ	Milk, yogurt, clarified butter, cow urine, and cow dung.
ལྟུང-བ-སྡེ-ལྔ	The 253 different transgressions a monk may incur are divided into five types: defeats, transgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha, offenses, transgressions requiring personal confession, and faults.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-879.\nfive types of lapses
ཟག-མེད-ཕུང-པོ-ལྔ	 These are equivalent to the five definitive aggregates.|These are equivalent to the five definitive aggregates. 
མངོན-པར-ཞེན	become fixated on
མངོན-པར-ཞེན-པར-བྱེད	become fixated on
ཤུ-དག	 Acorus calamus. | Acorus calamus; sweet flag.| Acorus calamus; sweet flag. |Acorus calamus. 
ནེ-ཙོའམ-ཅི	Butea monosperma, Butea frondosa, and Erythrina monosperma. A tree that grows up to 15 meters tall and has bright red flowers. Other names include parrot tree, bastard teak, dhak (Hindi), palas (Hindi), porasum (Tamil); and khakda (Gujarati).
ཤ-རི-ས	 Albizzia lebbeck Benth. (Acacia Sirissa.)|Albizzia lebbeck Benth. (Acacia Sirissa.) 
སྐྱ-རྦབ	 Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.| Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011. |Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011. 
དམིགས-པ	 Conceptual mind. Also translated “focus” q.v.|Also translated “reference point” q.v. 
གནས-སུ-བྱ-བ-མེད-པ	 Name of the eighty-first meditative stability.|Name of the eighty-first meditative stability. 
སེམས-རྩེ-གཅིག-པ	 one-pointed mental focus| one-pointed mental focus |one-pointed mental focus 
སྔགས-པ	 A practitioner of mantra; a follower of the Mantra Vehicle.|A practitioner of mantra; a follower of the Mantra Vehicle. 
དུས-སུ-རུང-བ	 One of “the four medicines.” “Food fit for a time” is food eaten between dawn and noon, the appropriate time according to the monastic code. It refers mainly to maṇḍa (scum of boiled rice), odana (boiled rice gruel), kulmāsa (sour gruel), and māṃsapūpā (meat cake). It is medicinal in that it is primarily aimed at combating the “illness” of hunger. An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.|One of “the four medicines.” “Food fit for a time” is food eaten between dawn and noon, the appropriate time according to the monastic code. It refers mainly to maṇḍa (scum of boiled rice), odana (boiled rice gruel), kulmāsa (sour gruel), and māṃsapūpā (meat cake). It is medicinal in that it is primarily aimed at combating the “illness” of hunger. An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
ཐུན-ཚོད-དུ-རུང-བ	 One of ‘the four medicines.” This category of medicine is comprised of juices and selected other strained or pulp-free liquids, which were mainly allowed as they helped to combat the ‘illness” of thirst. This includes coca (coconut milk), moca (gum of the śālmalī tree), kola (jujube, sour juice or vinegar), aśvattha (juice of leaves of the fig-tree or bodhi tree), udumbara (juice of leaves of the fig-tree), pāruṣika (juice of Frewia Asiatica), mṛdvikā (raisin juice), kharjura (date juice).\nfit for a period|One of ‘the four medicines.” This category of medicine is comprised of juices and selected other strained or pulp-free liquids, which were mainly allowed as they helped to combat the ‘illness” of thirst. This includes coca (coconut milk), moca (gum of the śālmalī tree), kola (jujube, sour juice or vinegar), aśvattha (juice of leaves of the fig-tree or bodhi tree), udumbara (juice of leaves of the fig-tree), pāruṣika (juice of Frewia Asiatica), mṛdvikā (raisin juice), kharjura (date juice).\nfit for a period 
ཤིང-དྲུང	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
མིང-དང-གཟུགས	 A name for the embryonic phase of an individual’s existence where there is form but the rest of the skandhas or aggregates, which are mental, are undeveloped and have only a nominal presence. | Literally “name and form” means the mental and physical consituents of a being. It is a synonym for the five skandhas, with the four aggregates of the mind being called “names.” In the context of the twelve phases of dependent origination the term is also used specifically to refer to the embryonic phase of an individual’s existence where the mental aggregates are undeveloped and have only a nominal presence, and therefore are called “names.”|Literally “name and form” means the mental and physical consituents of a being. It is a synonym for the five skandhas, with the four aggregates of the mind being called “names.” In the context of the twelve phases of dependent origination the term is also used specifically to refer to the embryonic phase of an individual’s existence where the mental aggregates are undeveloped and have only a nominal presence, and therefore are called “names.” 
མིང-གཟུགས	 Fourth of the twelve links of dependent origination.| Fourth of the twelve links of dependent origination. |Fourth of the twelve links of dependent origination. 
འདུ-བྱེད	 One of the five aggregates; formative forces concomitant with the production of karmic seeds causing future samsaric existence. | Second of the twelve links of dependent origination. This term denotes the deep-seated predispositions inherited from past actions and experiences, some of which function in association with mind, while others do not. Formative predispositions are critical to the Buddhist understanding of the causal dynamics of karma and conditioning. It is the collection of such countless predispositions by afflicted mental states that constitutes the obscuration of misconceptions concerning the known range of phenomena, the total eradication of which occurs only when full awakening or buddhahood is achieved. | See “aggregate.”| The fourth of the five aggregates. | The meaning of this term varies according to context; as one of the skandhas it means the entire array of negative, positive, and neutral mental activities. | The various conditioning factors and circumstances that affect rebirth, including primarily (but not only) karma. Formative factors also constitute one of the five aggregates and figure as one of the links in the twelve links of dependent arising to account for how karma eventually leads to rebirth. |The meaning of this term varies according to context; as one of the skandhas, it means “various mental activities.” In terms of the twelve phases of dependent origination it is the second, “formation” or “creation”: activities with karmic results. 
གཟུགས-མེད-པའི-སྙོམས-པར-འཇུག-པ	See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-174.\nformless absorptions
གཟུགས-མེད-པའི-སྙོམས-པར-འཇུག-པ-བཞི	 As found listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-174, these comprise (1) the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite space, (2) the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite consciousness, (3) the meditative absorption of the sense field of nothing-at-all, and (4) the meditative absorption of neither perception nor non-perception.\nThe four formless absorptions and their fruits are discussed in Jamgon Kongtrul, TOK Book 6, Pt. 2: 436–438.\nfour formless absorptions|As found listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-174, these comprise (1) the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite space, (2) the meditative absorption of the sense field of infinite consciousness, (3) the meditative absorption of the sense field of nothing-at-all, and (4) the meditative absorption of neither perception nor non-perception.\nThe four formless absorptions and their fruits are discussed in Jamgon Kongtrul, TOK Book 6, Pt. 2: 436–438.\nfour formless absorptions 
གཟུགས-མེད-པའི-ཁམས	One of the three realms of saṃsāra, characterized by having only a subtle mental form.
གཟུགས-མེད-ཁམས	One of the three realms. See glossary s.v. three realms ({khams gsum}).
ཚེམས-བཞི-བཅུ-མངའ-བ	Twenty-first of the thirty-two major marks.
བསླབ-པའི-གཞི	 Refers to the knowledge and stability that conduce to abandoning disturbing emotions or the basic precepts one pledges to uphold when going for refuge, such as refraining from killing.|Refers to the knowledge and stability that conduce to abandoning disturbing emotions or the basic precepts one pledges to uphold when going for refuge, such as refraining from killing. 
སྤྱོད-ལམ-བཞི	The four acceptable norms of behavior concern posture while walking, standing, sitting, and lying down. See Nordrang Urgyen (2008), 718–719.
རྫུ-འཕྲུལ-གྱི-རྐང-པ-བཞི	 The first basis of magical power consists of the energy from the conscious cultivation of concentration of will (chanda­samādhi­prahāṇa­saṃskāra­samanvāgataḥ). The second consists of the energy from the conscious cultivation of concentration of mind (citta‑). The third consists of concentration of effort (vīrya‑). The fourth consists of concentration of analysis (mīmāṃsa‑). These four form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment.| The four supports for miraculous ability, as enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-161, comprise (1) the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of resolution with the formative force of exertion, (2) the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of perseverance with the formative force of exertion, (3) the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of mind with the formative force of exertion, and (4) the support for miraculous ability combining the meditative stability of scrutiny with the formative force of exertion.\nfour supports for miraculous abilities |The first basis of magical power consists of the energy from the conscious cultivation of concentration of will (chanda­samādhi­prahāṇa­saṃskāra­samanvāgataḥ). The second consists of the energy from the conscious cultivation of concentration of mind (citta‑). The third consists of concentration of effort (vīrya‑). The fourth consists of concentration of analysis (mīmāṃsa‑). These four form a part of the thirty-seven aids to enlightenment. 
སྦྱོར-བ-བཞི	The four bonds, according to Nordrang Orgyan (2008): 808, have eight distinct enumerations, among which they are identified in the commentarial tradition of the Abhi­dharma­kośa with the four torrents, which immediately follow in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-875.
གླིང-བཞི	According to traditional Indian cosmology, our human world of “patient endurance” (sahālokadhātu, {mi mjed 'jig rten gyi khams}) is said to comprise four continents, namely, Pūrva­videha in the east, Jambu­dvīpa in the south, Apara­godānīya in the west, and Uttarakuru in the north. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1116.
གླིང-བཞིའི-བདག-པོ	 See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1116.| See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1116. |See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1116. 
ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག-བཞི	 Taking what is impermanent to be permanent, what is painful to be delightful, what is unclean to be clean, and what is no self to be a self. | These consist of mistaking what is impermanent for permanent; mistaking what is without self for self-possessing; mistaking what is impure for pure; and mistaking what is miserable for happy.|Taking what is impure as pure; what is impermanent as permanent; what is suffering as happiness; and what is non-self as a self. 
ལྟ-སྟང-བཞི	Four gazes employed for the four activities: enthralling, summoning, killing, and paralyzing.
སོ-སོ-ཡང-དག-པར-རིག-པ-བཞི	 These four unhindered discernments—the essentials through which the buddhas impart their teachings—comprise (1) unhindered discernment of meaning, (2) unhindered discernment of the doctrine, (3) unhindered discernment of etymology, and (4) unhindered discernment of inspiration. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-253.\nOn the philological origins of these four unhindered discernments, see Konow (1941): 40, and the reconstructed Sanskrit on p. 107; also Dayal (1932): 259–267, and Sparham (2012 IV): 78–79.|Genuine discrimination with respect to dharmas, meaning, language, and eloquence. 
རྒྱ-མཚོ-ཆེན-པོ-བཞི	Four oceans believed to surround the central mountain, Mt. Meru, in Indian cosmology.
ཚད-མེད-བཞི	 Immeasurable states, otherwise known as “pure abodes” (brahmā­vihāra). Immeasurable love arises from the wish for all living beings to have happiness and the cause of happiness. Immeasurable compassion arises from the wish for all living beings to be free from suffering and its cause. Immeasurable joy arises from the wish that living beings not be sundered from the supreme happiness of liberation. And immeasurable impartiality arises from the wish that the preceding—love, compassion, and joy—should apply equally to all living beings, without attachment to friend or hatred for enemy.| Love, compassion, joy, and equanimity. |As mentioned in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-172, these are (1) loving kindness, (2) compassion, (3) empathetic joy, and (4) equanimity. On training in the four immeasurable aspirations, see Padmakara Translation Group (1994): 195–217. 
ཚད-མེད-པའི-གནས-གཞི	Immeasurable loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and impartiality.
དགའ-བཞི	The four types of bliss arising during sexual intercourse, the full understanding of which leads to liberation.
དགའ-བ-བཞི	The four types of bliss arising during sexual intercourse, the full understanding of which leads to liberation.
ནད-བཞི	See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2097.
མདུད-པ-བཞི	The four knots comprise covetousness, malice, moral supremacy, and ascetic supremacy. See Zhang Yisun et al (1985): 1379. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-875.
རྒྱལ-པོ-ཆེན-པོ-བཞི	 Four deities on the base of Mount Meru, each one the guardian of his direction: Vaiśravaṇa in the north, Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the east; Virūpākṣa in the west; and Virūḍhaka in the south.|Four deities on the base of Mount Meru, each one the guardian of his direction: Vaiśravaṇa in the north, Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the east; Virūpākṣa in the west; and Virūḍhaka in the south. 
བསམ-གཏན-བཞི	Described at length in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-170. See also “meditative concentration.”\nThe four meditative concentrations and their fruits are specifically examined in Jamgon Kongtrul, TOK Book 6, Pt. 2: 427–436. For Pāli and Sanskrit sources, see Dayal (1932): 225–231.
ཕྱིན-ཅི-ལོག-པ-བཞི	The four misconceptions, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-875, comprise holding impurity to be purity, holding non-self to be self, holding suffering to be happiness, and holding impermanence to be permanence. See Negi (1993-2005): 3569 and Zhang Yisun et al (1985): 1748. At http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2139 they are expressed in slightly dissimilar language, namely: the notion that there is permanence, the notion that there is happiness, the notion that there is a self, and the notion that existence is pleasant.
གསོལ-བ-དང-བཞི-པ	For someone to be accepted into the Saṅgha, and for any other action that needs the assent of the Saṅgha, first a motion (jñāpti; {gsol.ba}) is presented to the community, for example, a certain person’s wish for ordination. The motion would be followed by three propositions, in which is it said that all who assent should remain silent. If no one speaks up after the third proposition, the motion is passed. The Tibetan translated it literally as “supplication and fourth.”
འཕགས-པའི-བདེན-པ-བཞི	 The first teaching of the Buddha, covering suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path to the cessation of suffering. | The four noble truths, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-153, comprise (1) the noble truth of suffering, (2) the noble truth of the origin of suffering, (3) the noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and (4) the noble truth of the path. (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-154).\nOn the twelve aspects pertaining to the four noble truths, see note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1530.\nnoble truths | The four truths the Buddha realized at his enlightenment: the truth of suffering, the truth of the origin, the truth of cessation, the truth of the path.| The four truths the Buddha realized at his enlightenment: the truth of suffering, the truth of the origin, the truth of cessation, the truth of the path. |The first teaching of the Buddha, covering suffering, the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path to the cessation of suffering. 
ཟས-བཞི	The four nourishments comprise the nourishment of food, the nourishment of sensory contact, the nourishment of mentation, and the nourishment of consciousness, the first two of which are directed toward the present life and the last two to the subsequent life. See Negi (1993-2005): 5382 and Zhang Yisun et al (1985): 2457. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-875.
འདུ-ཤེས-བཞི	 The factual perceptions of that which is impermanent, painful, unclean, and devoid of self.|The factual perceptions of that which is impermanent, painful, unclean, and devoid of self. 
རྟོན-པ-བཞི	 See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-071-014.html#UT22084-071-014-34.|To attain higher realizations and final enlightenment, the bodhisattva should rely on the meaning (of the teaching) and not on the expression (artha­pratisāraṇena bhavitavyaṃ na vyañjana­pratisāraṇena); on the teaching and not on the person (who teaches it) (dharma­pratisāraṇena bhavitavyaṃ na pudgala­pratisāraṇena); on gnosis and not on normal consciousness (jñāna­pratisāraṇena bhavitavyaṃ na vijñāna­pratisāraṇena); and on discourses of definitive meaning and not on discourses of interpretable meaning (nītārtha­sūtra­pratisāraṇena bhavitavyaṃ na neyārtha­sūtra­pratisāraṇena) according to the order in this sūtra. The usual order, “teaching-reliance,” “meaning-reliance,” definitive-meaning-discourse-reliance,” and “gnosis-reliance,” seems to conform better to stages of practice. 
གནས-བཞི	 In getting ordained, a monk pledges to make do with a restricted set of resources that conduce to the spiritual life. These fall into four categories: clothing, shelter, food, and medicine.|In getting ordained, a monk pledges to make do with a restricted set of resources that conduce to the spiritual life. These fall into four categories: clothing, shelter, food, and medicine. 
ཕྱག-རྒྱ-བཞི	A synonym for the “four aphorisms of the Dharma,” q.v. Often seen in Tibetan in the expanded form {bka' rtags kyi phyag rgya bzhi} (“the four seals of the [Buddha’s] teaching”), the nearest Sanskrit equivalent being dṛṣṭi­nimitta­mudrā (“the seals that are the marks of the [Buddhist] view”).
བཀར-བཏགས-བཞི	 All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace.| All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace. |All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྡོམ-བཞི	 All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace.| All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace. |All conditioned phenomena are impermanent; all defilements are suffering; all phenomena are without self; nirvāṇa is peace. 
ཆུ-བོ-བཞི	The four torrents, which are to be abandoned, comprise the torrent of fundamental ignorance, the torrent of wrong view, the torrent of rebirth, and the torrent of craving. See Nyima and Dorje (2001): 1075. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-875.
བདེན-པ-བཞི	The four Noble Truths as taught by the Buddha, i.e. the truth of suffering, and so forth.
རིག-བྱེད-བཞི	 The textual base for Brahmanism in India is the Vedas: 1) Ṛgveda, 2) Yajurveda, 3) Sāmaveda, and 4) Atharvaveda.|The textual base for Brahmanism in India is the Vedas: 1) Ṛgveda, 2) Yajurveda, 3) Sāmaveda, and 4) Atharvaveda. 
དུ-རུ-ཀ	Also called olibanum, this is a resin from trees of the genus Boswellia, in this case Boswellia serrata, “Indian frankincense.” It is also known as salai and śallakī.
ཟད-པ-དང-བྲལ-བ	Name of the forty-third meditative stability.
སྤྲོད-པ-མེད-པ	Free from concepts or mental fabrications.
སེམས-མེད-པ	 Name of the thirty-third meditative stability.|Name of the thirty-third meditative stability. 
སྒེ-གཤེར	Zingiber officinale
མཐའ-འཁོབ-ཀྱི-མི-རྣམས	I.e., those living beyond the pale of civilization, out of reach of the sacred doctrine.
མངོན-པར-རྫོགས-པར-སངས-རྒྱས	A person who has manifested the complete enlightenment of a buddha of the greater vehicle.
རྣམ-པར-བྱང-བ	 The purification of affliction.|The opposite of ‘totally afflicted.’ 
མ-རིག-པ	 First of the twelve links of dependent origination; first of the four torrents; third of the fetters associated with the higher realms.|First of the twelve links of dependent origination; first of the four torrents; third of the fetters associated with the higher realms. 
ཕས-ཕམ-པ	 The four downfalls for monastics resulting in the forfeit of the monastic vows: sexual intercourse, theft, murder, and claiming greater realization than one has.|The four downfalls for monastics resulting in the forfeit of the monastic vows: sexual intercourse, theft, murder, and claiming greater realization than one has. 
འགོས-ལྷས-བཙས	11th century translator and teacher of Guhya­samāja­tantra.
སང-སང-པོའི-དབྱངས	 A bodhisattva in a distant realm.|A bodhisattva in a distant realm. 
ནམ-མཁའ-མཛོད	 In the Kāraṇḍavyūha it is the name of both a bodhisattva and a samādhi. In this sūtra the bodhisattva is a pupil of Buddha Viśvabhū, but he is also portrayed in other sūtras receiving teaching from Śākyamuni, and is one of the sixteen bodhisattvas in the Vairocana maṇḍala.|In the Kāraṇḍavyūha it is the name of both a bodhisattva and a samādhi. In this sūtra the bodhisattva is a pupil of Buddha Viśvabhū, but he is also portrayed in other sūtras receiving teaching from Śākyamuni, and is one of the sixteen bodhisattvas in the Vairocana maṇḍala. 
སེང-གེའི-སྟབས-སུ-གཤེགས-པ	Forty-second of the eighty minor marks.
གླང-པོ-ཆེའི-དབང-པོའི-སྟབས-སུ-གཤེགས-པ	Forty-third of the eighty minor marks.
ངང-པའི-སྟབས-སུ-གཤེགས-པ	Forty-fourth of the eighty minor marks.
གླང-ཆེན-པི-པི-ལིང	 Scindapsis officinalis.|Scindapsis officinalis. 
ས-སྐྱུར-མོ	The solidified resin of Garcinia morella.
སྒམ-པོ-པ	Gampopa Sonam Rinchen ({sgam po pa bsod nams rin chen}, 1079–1153). A disciple of Milarepa, and the founder of the monastic Kagyu tradition; also known as Dakpopa ({dwags po pa}) or Dakpo Lharjé ({dwags po lha rje}).
ཚོགས-ཀྱི-འཁོར-ལོ	A ritual feast for different classes of nonhuman beings.
ཚོགས-བདག	 One of the Hindu gods, often identified with Gaṇeśa.|One of the Hindu gods, often identified with Gaṇeśa. 
སྤོས-ཀྱི-གླང-པོ-ཆེ	 A principal bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna sūtras. He is described in this sūtra as coming from Akṣobhya’s realm.|A principal bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna sūtras. He is described in this sūtra as coming from Akṣobhya’s realm. 
སྤོས-ཀྱི-གླང-པོ	 Name of a bodhisattva.|Name of a bodhisattva. 
སྤོས-ཀྱི-ངད-ལྡན	 A mountain known for its incense trees.|A mountain known for its incense trees. 
སྤོས-ངད-ཅན	 A legendary mountain north of the Himalayas, with Lake Anavatapta, the source of the worlds great rivers, at its base. It is said to be south of Mount Kailash, though both have been identified with Mount Tise in west Tibet.|A legendary mountain north of the Himalayas, with Lake Anavatapta, the source of the worlds great rivers, at its base. It is said to be south of Mount Kailash, though both have been identified with Mount Tise in west Tibet. 
སྤོས-ངད-ལྡང	 A legendary mountain north of the Himalayas, with Lake Anavatapta, the source of the worlds great rivers, at its base. It is said to be south of Mount Kailash, though both have been identified with Mount Tise in west Tibet.|A legendary mountain north of the Himalayas, with Lake Anavatapta, the source of the worlds great rivers, at its base. It is said to be south of Mount Kailash, though both have been identified with Mount Tise in west Tibet. 
སྤོས-ནད-ལྡན	 A legendary mountain north of the Himalayas, with Lake Anavatapta, the source of the worlds great rivers, at its base. It is said to be south of Mount Kailash, though both have been identified with Mount Tise in west Tibet.|A legendary mountain north of the Himalayas, with Lake Anavatapta, the source of the worlds great rivers, at its base. It is said to be south of Mount Kailash, though both have been identified with Mount Tise in west Tibet. 
སྤོས-འོད	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
དྲི-ཟ	 A class of semidivine beings sometimes referred to as heavenly musicians. | A class of sentient being who lives on scents; literally “smell eater.” Also a type of celestial musician living on the rim of Mt. Sumeru. | A class of spirit who lives on scents. Also, a type of celestial musician living on the rim of Mt Sumeru. | A race of deities who are particularly known to be musicians. | A semi-divine being “feeding on smell” and musically skilled. | Class of ethereal beings, living on scents.\nscent-eater | Gandharvas (literally “odor eaters”) are generally regarded as a class of menacing divine offspring, but in Abhidharma the term is often used differently—as a synonym for the mental body assumed by any sentient being of the world system of desire (kāma­dhātu) during the intermediate state between death and rebirth. | Gandharvas, lit. “smell-eaters.” A class of deities known for being skilled musicians. Also the name of spirits in the bardo state. | Gandharvas, literally “smell-eaters,” are a class of spirits, sometimes described as celestial musicians. In other contexts the term can also refer to beings in the bardo-state. | Lit. “scent-eater.” A heavenly musician. | Lit. “smell eater.” Gandharvas are a class of spirits and minor gods (deva) in both Hindu and Buddhist cosmologies. They are supposedly messengers, singers and skilled musicians and dancers. Often closely associated with various nature-spirits (yakṣa), they are on occasion depicted as disturbing to monks practicing meditation. | Lower class of divine being, under the control of the Guardian King of the East. Capable of flight, they are often described as “celestial musicians.” | The name of a kind of preta (ghost). These spirits are said to live on odours, hence their name “smell-eater.” Known for their music. | Usually, a particular category of semi-divine celestial being, one of the four kinds on the four sides of Mount Meru; but in the context of the process of rebirth (e.g. in 1.86 in this sūtra), gandharva refers to the consciousness of the being between death and the next rebirth.| Usually, a particular category of semi-divine celestial being, one of the four kinds on the four sides of Mount Meru; but in the context of the process of rebirth (e.g. in 1.86 in this sūtra), gandharva refers to the consciousness of the being between death and the next rebirth. |Gandharvas, lit. “smell-eaters.” A class of deities known for being skilled musicians. Also the name of spirits in the bardo state. 
དྲི-ཟ-མོ	 Female gandharva.|Female gandharva. 
སྤོས-བཀོད-པའི-ཟས	 Deities who attend on the Buddha Sugandhakūta in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā.|Deities who attend on the Buddha Sugandhakūta in the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā. 
སྤོས-མཆོག	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
སྤོས-མཆོག-བརྩེགས-པ	 Buddha of the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, from whom Vimalakīrti’s emanation-bodhisattva obtains the vessel of ambrosial food that magically feeds the entire assembly without diminishing in the slightest.|Buddha of the universe Sarva­gandha­sugandhā, from whom Vimalakīrti’s emanation-bodhisattva obtains the vessel of ambrosial food that magically feeds the entire assembly without diminishing in the slightest. 
ཚོགས-ཀྱི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 A name that appears twice in the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni in previous lifetimes received the Samādhirāja, and who is described in particular in chapter 38.|A name that appears twice in the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni in previous lifetimes received the Samādhirāja, and who is described in particular in chapter 38. 
གང-ག	 The sacred river of North India.| The sacred river of North India. |The sacred river of North India. 
གང-གཱའི-ཀླུང	 The sacred river of North India.|The sacred river of North India. 
གཡུང-པོའི-ཁྱིམ	 Also translated here as “garbage collector.”| Also translated here as “garbage collector.” |Also translated here as “refuse scavenger.” 
བོང-བུ	 A powerful yakṣa of the Himalayas.|A powerful yakṣa of the Himalayas. 
གར-གཱ	 A famous Puranic rishi of India, who features particularly in the Vaishnavite literature.|A famous Puranic rishi of India, who features particularly in the Vaishnavite literature. 
ཕྲེང-བའི-སྔགས	 A mantra that surrounds the central item in a diagram or magical drawing.| A mantra that surrounds the central item in a diagram or magical drawing. |A mantra that surrounds the central item in a diagram or magical drawing. 
ལག-ན-ཕྲེང-ཐོགས	 Name of a class of gods, a group of yakṣa associated with the Four Great Kings.| Name of a class of gods, a group of yakṣa associated with the Four Great Kings. |Name of a class of gods, a group of yakṣa associated with the Four Great Kings. 
ནམ-མཁའ-ལྡིང	 A mythical creature which is half bird, half man, and is the enemy of serpents. | A semi-divine bird. | A supernatural being that is a gigantic bird with humanoid features. | An epithet for the mythical, bird-like creature garuḍa.| An epithet for the mythical, bird-like creature garuḍa. | As a personal name this refers to the deity who is said to be the ancestor of all birds and became the steed of Viṣṇu; he is also worshipped in his own right. | Lower class of divine being, described as an eagle-type bird with a gigantic wing span. They were traditionally enemies of the nāgas. In the Vedas, they were thought to have brought nectar from the heavens to earth. | Magical bird, which protects from snakes. | Mythical bird. |Lower class of divine being, described as an eagle-type bird with a gigantic wing span. They were traditionally enemies of the nāgas. In the Vedas, they were thought to have brought nectar from the heavens to earth. 
ཁྱུང	 A mythical bird normally depicted with a sharp, owl-like beak, often holding a snake, and with large and powerful wings. In Buddhism, the symbolism of the garuḍa is generally‌ associated with pristine cognition (it is said that the garuḍa can fly as soon as it is hatched) and with the consuming of afflicted mental states (the holding of a snake in its beak).| A mythical bird normally depicted with a sharp, owl-like beak, often holding a snake, and with large and powerful wings. In Buddhism, the symbolism of the garuḍa is generally‌ associated with pristine cognition (it is said that the garuḍa can fly as soon as it is hatched) and with the consuming of afflicted mental states (the holding of a snake in its beak). | A supernatural being that is a gigantic bird with humanoid features. | One of the races of supernatural beings said to come to listen to the Buddha’s teachings; it is a bird with humanoid features, gigantic in size. |A supernatural being that is a gigantic bird with humanoid features. 
འཁྱུང	 A class of semi-divine bird-like beings.| A class of semi-divine bird-like beings. |A class of semi-divine bird-like beings. 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པའི-སྒོ-མཚན-མ-མེད-པ	 Second of the three gateways to liberation.\nsignlessness that is a gateway to liberation| Second of the three gateways to liberation.\nsignlessness that is a gateway to liberation |Second of the three gateways to liberation.\nsignlessness that is a gateway to liberation 
ཚིགས-སུ-བཅད-པ	 As one of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra (more commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine), it means those teachings given in verse.| As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means those teachings given in verse.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” |As one of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra (more commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine), it means those teachings given in verse. 
ཚིགས-སུ-བཅད-པའི-སྡེ	 Fourth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.|Fourth of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
བ-མེན	Bos gaurus, a massive wild ox, also called the Indian bison. The largest extant bovine.
གཽ-ཏ-མ	 One of the seven great rishis of ancient India. Author of some of the vedas. His Dharmasūtra specified renunciation as yellow robes, shaved head, and being called a bhikṣu. Buddha Śākyamuni was his descendant.|One of the seven great rishis of ancient India. Author of some of the vedas. His Dharmasūtra specified renunciation as yellow robes, shaved head, and being called a bhikṣu. Buddha Śākyamuni was his descendant. 
བ-ལང-བདག	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. | One of the first to join the Buddha’s order of monks. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order.| One of the first to join the Buddha’s order of monks. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order. | One of the group of five friends who were the second group to become students of the Buddha, and he was one of the ten students of the Buddha who were the first to become arhats. | Śrāvaka arhat; one of the Buddha's five close arhat disciples. He took ordination from the Buddha and then became a disciple of Śāriputra. |One of the group of five friends who were the second group to become students of the Buddha, and he was one of the ten students of the Buddha who were the first to become arhats. 
ག-ཡ	 One of the sacred towns of ancient India, south of the Ganges in present-day Bihar. In the Buddha’s lifetime, this was in the kingdom of Magadha. Uruvilvā, the area including Bodhgaya where the Buddha attained enlightenment, is nearby to the south, upriver from Gayā.|One of the sacred towns of ancient India, south of the Ganges in present-day Bihar. In the Buddha’s lifetime, this was in the kingdom of Magadha. Uruvilvā, the area including Bodhgaya where the Buddha attained enlightenment, is nearby to the south, upriver from Gayā. 
ག-ཡཱ-འོད-སྲུང	 The brother of Nadīkāśyapa and Uru­vilvā­kāśyapa. A practitioner of fire offering at Uruvilvā (Bodhgaya), he and his two hundred pupils were converted to becoming bhikṣus of the Buddha. He and his brothers and their pupils were the third group to become followers of the Buddha after his enlightenment.|The brother of Nadīkāśyapa and Uru­vilvā­kāśyapa. A practitioner of fire offering at Uruvilvā (Bodhgaya), he and his two hundred pupils were converted to becoming bhikṣus of the Buddha. He and his brothers and their pupils were the third group to become followers of the Buddha after his enlightenment. 
ག-ཡ-འོད-སྲུང	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.|Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. 
ག-ཡཱ-མགོ	 Site of a stūpa where the Buddha instructed the thousand monks from Uruvilvā by displaying three miracles, thereby freeing them from the wilds of saṃsāra and establishing them in the utterly final state of perfection and the unsurpassably blissful state of nirvāṇa.|Site of a stūpa where the Buddha instructed the thousand monks from Uruvilvā by displaying three miracles, thereby freeing them from the wilds of saṃsāra and establishing them in the utterly final state of perfection and the unsurpassably blissful state of nirvāṇa. 
བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སེམས-བསྐྱེད	 The altruistic resolve to achieve complete and perfect Buddhahood for the sake of oneself and all sentient beings.|The altruistic resolve to achieve complete and perfect Buddhahood for the sake of oneself and all sentient beings. 
སྦྱིན-པ	First of the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva. However, in the context‌ of the transcendent perfections, generosity is the first of the six transcendent perfections.
སྦྱིན-པའི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 First of the six transcendent perfections.| First of the six transcendent perfections. |First of the six transcendent perfections. 
ཡང-དག-པར-རྫོགས-པའི-སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ས	 Name of the tenth of the levels of realization attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.|Name of the tenth of the levels of realization attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282. 
ང-ཡང-དག-པར-རྫོགས-པའི-སངས-རྒྱས-སོ	 First of the Buddha’s four assurances.| First of the Buddha’s four assurances. |First of the Buddha’s four assurances. 
ངས-སྡུག-བསྔལ-ཡང-དག-པར-ཟད-པར-འགྱུར-བའི-ལམ-གང-བཤད-པ	 Fourth of the Buddha’s four assurances.| Fourth of the Buddha’s four assurances. |Fourth of the Buddha’s four assurances. 
དགེ-བའི-བློ-གྲོས	 One of the three translators responsible for the canonical translation of the SEV.|Ma Gewai Lodrö ({ma dge ba'i blo gros}), a Tibetan lotsāva, was an important disciple of Rinchen Zangpo ({rin chen bzang po}, 958-1055) who translated several texts with Atiśa and worked with the Kaśmīri master Subhūti­śri­bhadra to translate a number of pramāṇa texts. 
དབྱངས-བསྙད	 The repetition of prose passages in verse form. Literally “that which is to be chanted.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine.| The repetition of prose passages in verse form. Literally “that which is to be chanted.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. |The repetition of prose passages in verse form. Literally “that which is to be chanted.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. 
དབྱངས-ཀྱིས-བསྙད-པ	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means the repletion of prose passages in verse form.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means the repletion of prose passages in verse form.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
དབྱངས-བསྙད-ཀྱི-སྡེ	 Second of the twelve branches of the scriptures.| Second of the twelve branches of the scriptures. |Second of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
ཞུན-མར	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
དབྱངས-བྱིན	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
དབྱངས-ཀྱི-བློ-གྲོས	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
ཡི-དྭགས	 A class of beings suffering interminable hunger and thirst. | A class of sentient beings constantly suffering from hunger and thirst, one of the six (or five) possible realms of rebirth.| A class of sentient beings constantly suffering from hunger and thirst, one of the six (or five) possible realms of rebirth. |A class of beings suffering interminable hunger and thirst. 
ཨར-ཀ	Calotropis gigantea.
བྲུ-ཤ	 In modern NW Pakistan.|In modern NW Pakistan. 
ཀོན-ཙི	 Appears to mean “a person from Kañci.” Unidentified. Possibly a description of Pūrna, who is next in the list of the Buddha’s disciples. Alternatively this may be Kaccāna, also known as Kaccāyana, but principally as Katyayāna, one of the Buddha’s ten principal pupils.|Appears to mean “a person from Kañci.” Unidentified. Possibly a description of Pūrna, who is next in the list of the Buddha’s disciples. Alternatively this may be Kaccāna, also known as Kaccāyana, but principally as Katyayāna, one of the Buddha’s ten principal pupils. 
རི-བོ-ལེགས-པ	 A nāga king who was a devotee of the Buddha. King Bimbisara once banished him and another nāga because they did not honor him. A drought occurred, and on the Buddha’s advice, he asked the nāgas for their forgiveness.|A nāga king who was a devotee of the Buddha. King Bimbisara once banished him and another nāga because they did not honor him. A drought occurred, and on the Buddha’s advice, he asked the nāgas for their forgiveness. 
ཉ-གྲོ-དྷ-ལྟར-ཆུ-ཞེང-གབ-པ	Nineteenth of the thirty-two major marks.
དགའ-བས-བྱིན	 Bodhisattva of the zenith.|Bodhisattva of the zenith. 
གནས-སྦྱིན-པ	A monk who gives you instruction for even a single day. One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.
རབ-ཏུ-འབྱུང-བ	To leave the life of a householder and embrace the life of a wandering, renunciant follower of the Buddha.
ལྷའི-བུ	A being of any of the many levels of celestial or divine realms according to Buddhist cosmology.
ལྷ-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Sixth of the ten recollections.| Sixth of the ten recollections. |Sixth of the ten recollections. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-དབྱིངས-ཀྱི-དབང-ཕྱུག-མ	 Consort of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. | Consort of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. See also “Vajra realm.”| Consort of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. See also “Vajra realm.” |Consort of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. See also “Vajra realm.” 
རིང-དུ-སོང-བ	 The seventh bodhisattva bhūmi.|The seventh bodhisattva level. 
ལྦ-བ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
གསེར-གྱི-གཟུ-བ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
མདོག-གསེར-ལྟ-བུ-དང-ལྡན-པ	 Fourteenth of the thirty-two major marks.|Fourteenth of the thirty-two major marks. 
དཔལ-གྱི-སྙིང-པོའི-གསེར-འོད	 A bodhisattva.| A bodhisattva. |A bodhisattva. 
རིང-དུ-སོང	The seventh bodhisattva bhūmi.
གོ-པཱ	 The name of Buddha’s wife as found in some texts, including the Lalitavistara; the name of Buddha's tantric consort.|The name of Buddha’s wife as found in some texts, including the Lalitavistara; the name of Buddha's tantric consort. 
ས-འཚོ-མ	 The maiden whom the Buddha married while he was still a bodhisattva.|The maiden whom the Buddha married while he was still a bodhisattva. 
གནག-ལྷས-ཀྱི-བུ	 One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. Teacher and head of the Ājīvika sect.|One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. Teacher and head of the Ājīvika sect. 
གོ-Sཨིར-Sཨ	 A type of sandalwood that is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. In the Mahāvyutpatti it is translated as {sa mchog}, which means “supreme earth.” Later translations translate gośirṣa literally as “ox-head,” which is said to refer to the shape or name of the mountain where it grows. Appears to be red sandalwood, though that appears separately in the list of incenses.|A type of sandalwood that is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. In the Mahāvyutpatti it is translated as {sa mchog}, which means “supreme earth.” Later translations translate gośirṣa literally as “ox-head,” which is said to refer to the shape or name of the mountain where it grows. Appears to be red sandalwood, though that appears separately in the list of incenses. 
བ-གླང-གི-སྤོས	 A type of sandalwood that is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. In the Mahāvyutpatti it is translated as {sa mchog}, which means “supreme earth.” Later translations translate gośirṣa literally as “ox-head,” which is said to refer to the shape or name of the mountain where it grows. Appears to be red sandalwood, though that appears separately in the list of incenses.|A type of sandalwood that is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. In the Mahāvyutpatti it is translated as {sa mchog}, which means “supreme earth.” Later translations translate gośirṣa literally as “ox-head,” which is said to refer to the shape or name of the mountain where it grows. Appears to be red sandalwood, though that appears separately in the list of incenses. 
བ-གླང-མགོ	 A type of sandalwood that is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. In the Mahāvyutpatti it is translated as {sa mchog}, which means “supreme earth.” Later translations translate gośirṣa literally as “ox-head,” which is said to refer to the shape or name of the mountain where it grows. Appears to be red sandalwood, though that appears separately in the list of incenses.|A type of sandalwood that is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. In the Mahāvyutpatti it is translated as {sa mchog}, which means “supreme earth.” Later translations translate gośirṣa literally as “ox-head,” which is said to refer to the shape or name of the mountain where it grows. Appears to be red sandalwood, though that appears separately in the list of incenses. 
བ-ལང-གི-སྤོས-ཀྱི-ཙན-དན	 A particular kind of sandalwood, known as “ox-head,” that grows in southern India. It is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. The Sanskrit word go means “ox,” and śīrṣa means “head;” candana means “sandalwood.” The name of this sandalwood is said to derive from either the shape of or the name of a mountain upon which it grew. The Tibetan translated gośīrṣa as {ba lang gi spos} or “ox incense.”| A particular kind of sandalwood, known as “ox-head,” that grows in southern India. It is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. The Sanskrit word go means “ox,” and śīrṣa means “head;” candana means “sandalwood.” The name of this sandalwood is said to derive from either the shape of or the name of a mountain upon which it grew. The Tibetan translated gośīrṣa as {ba lang gi spos} or “ox incense.” |A particular kind of sandalwood, known as “ox-head,” that grows in southern India. It is reddish in color and has medicinal properties. It is said to have the finest fragrance of all sandalwood. The Sanskrit word go means “ox,” and śīrṣa means “head;” candana means “sandalwood.” The name of this sandalwood is said to derive from either the shape of or the name of a mountain upon which it grew. The Tibetan translated gośīrṣa as {ba lang gi spos} or “ox incense.” 
བྱིན-གྱིས-བརླབས	 The term is also translated as ‘blessing.’ It literally denotes the circumstance of something being affected ({brlabs}) by a force which has the capacity to change the way of thinking or the appearance of others ({}byin).| The term is also translated as ‘blessing.’ It literally denotes the circumstance of something being affected ({brlabs}) by a force which has the capacity to change the way of thinking or the appearance of others ({}byin). |The “supernatural power” with which the buddhas sustain the bodhisattvas in their great efforts on behalf of living beings. 
གདོན	 A type of evil spirit known to exert a harmful influence on the human body and mind. Grahas are closely associated with the planets and other astronomical bodies.|A type of evil spirit known to exert a harmful influence on the human body and mind. Grahas are closely associated with the planets and other astronomical bodies. 
གཟའ	 Eclipse; a class of spirits causing possession.|Eclipse; a class of spirits causing possession. 
གནོད-སྦྱིན-གྱི-གདོན	 A class of beings said to dwell in the north, under the jurisdiction of the great king Vaiśravaṇa.\nyakṣa variety of graha| A class of beings said to dwell in the north, under the jurisdiction of the great king Vaiśravaṇa.\nyakṣa variety of graha |A class of beings said to dwell in the north, under the jurisdiction of the great king Vaiśravaṇa.\nyakṣa variety of graha 
གཟས-བྱིན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
རྩྭའི-སྤྱིལ-བུ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བཀོད-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 Literally “Great Array” or “Great Display.” The name of a future eon.| Literally “Great Array” or “Great Display.” The name of a future eon. | The name of one of the bodhisattvas in the assembly in Chap. 1. |Name of the 102nd meditative stability. 
སྒྱུ-འཕྲུལ-ཆེན-མོ	 The female central deity of the Mahā­māyā Tantra who appears in the form of the male Heruka. She was also a popular form of the Brahmanical great goddess (Mahādevī), to whom the Buddhist figure is intimately related. Also rendered here as “Great Illusion.” | The female central deity of the Mahā­māyā Tantra who appears in the form of the male Heruka. She was also a popular form of the Brahmanical great goddess (Mahādevī), to whom the Buddhist figure is intimately related. Also rendered here as “Mahāmāyā.”| The female central deity of the Mahā­māyā Tantra who appears in the form of the male Heruka. She was also a popular form of the Brahmanical great goddess (Mahādevī), to whom the Buddhist figure is intimately related. Also rendered here as “Mahāmāyā.” |The female central deity of the Mahā­māyā Tantra who appears in the form of the male Heruka. She was also a popular form of the Brahmanical great goddess (Mahādevī), to whom the Buddhist figure is intimately related. Also rendered here as “Mahāmāyā.” 
བྱམས-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-255.| See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-255. |In an effort to maintain distinctions between Buddhism and Christianity, translators have used all sorts of euphemisms for this basic term. Granted, it is not the everyday “love” that means “to like”; it is still the altruistic love that is the finest inspiration of Christ’s teaching, as well as of the Mahāyāna. 
དགེ-སྦྱོང-ཆེན-པོ	 Epithet of the Buddha.|Epithet of the Buddha. 
དྲང-སོང-ཆེན-པོ	 Epithet of the Buddha.|Epithet of the Buddha. 
སྟོང-གསུམ-གྱི-སྟོང-ཆེན-པོ	 A universe comprised of a thousand groups of a thousand groups of a thousand worlds, each being a flat disc with its own sun and moon and central mountain. | The largest universe spoken of in Buddhist cosmology, consisting of one billion smaller world systems.| The largest universe spoken of in Buddhist cosmology, consisting of one billion smaller world systems. |The largest universe spoken of in Buddhist cosmology, consisting of one billion smaller world systems. 
ཐེག-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 Great Vehicle. | Literally the Sanskrit means “great way,” but in Buddhism this has developed the meaning of great vehicle, and so is translated literally into Tibetan as “great carrier.” | The same as the Bodhisattva Vehicle, whose practitioners aim at complete buddhahood. | The “Great Vehicle” of Buddhism, called “great” because it carries all living beings to enlightenment of Buddhahood. It is distinguished from the Hinayāna, including the Śrāvāka­yāna (Śrāvaka Vehicle) and Pratyeka­buddha­yāna (Solitary Sage Vehicle), which only carries each person who rides on it to their own personal liberation. | When the Buddhist teachings are classified according to their power to lead beings to an enlightened state, a distinction is made between the teachings of the Lesser Vehicle, which emphasizes the individual's own freedom from cyclic existence as the primary motivation and goal, and those of the Great Vehicle, which emphasizes altruism and has the liberation of all sentient beings as the principal objective. As the term “Great Vehicle” implies, the path followed by bodhisattvas is analogous to a large carriage which can transport a vast number of people to liberation, as compared to a smaller vehicle for the individual practitioner.| When the Buddhist teachings are classified according to their power to lead beings to an enlightened state, a distinction is made between the teachings of the Lesser Vehicle, which emphasizes the individual's own freedom from cyclic existence as the primary motivation and goal, and those of the Great Vehicle, which emphasizes altruism and has the liberation of all sentient beings as the principal objective. As the term “Great Vehicle” implies, the path followed by bodhisattvas is analogous to a large carriage which can transport a vast number of people to liberation, as compared to a smaller vehicle for the individual practitioner. |The same as the Bodhisattva Vehicle, whose practitioners aim at complete buddhahood. 
མཛེས-ཆེན	A buddha.
དྲུག-སྡེ	See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1575.
ཀུན-དགའ-ར-བ	An ārāma was a private citizen’s garden, generally found within the limits of a town or city.
རྒྱལ-བུ-རྒྱལ-བྱེད-ཀྱི-ཚལ	 A park outside Śrāvastī. It was donated to the Buddha by Anāthapiṇḍada, who purchased it at great cost from Prince Jeta. | The grove of Prince Jeta in Śrāvastī; the Buddha taught many of his discourses there, especially during the rainy season retreat.| The grove of Prince Jeta in Śrāvastī; the Buddha taught many of his discourses there, especially during the rainy season retreat. |A park outside Śrāvastī. It was donated to the Buddha by Anāthapiṇḍada, who purchased it at great cost from Prince Jeta. 
ཨ-མྲ-སྲུང-བའི-ཚལ	 A phrase usually translated as Āmrapālī’s grove, referring to the grove in Vaiśālī donated to the Buddha by the courtesan Āmrapālī (“Protected by a Mango Tree”), but here possibly to be interpreted as a generic term, as the narrative locates it in Vārāṇasī.| A phrase usually translated as Āmrapālī’s grove, referring to the grove in Vaiśālī donated to the Buddha by the courtesan Āmrapālī (“Protected by a Mango Tree”), but here possibly to be interpreted as a generic term, as the narrative locates it in Vārāṇasī. |A phrase usually translated as Āmrapālī’s grove, referring to the grove in Vaiśālī donated to the Buddha by the courtesan Āmrapālī (“Protected by a Mango Tree”), but here possibly to be interpreted as a generic term, as the narrative locates it in Vārāṇasī. 
སྐྱོ-མ	An acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ས-འོག-སྐྱོན	guardians of the nether world
ཕུག-སྦས	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
གསང-བ-པོ	 A class of devas that, like the yakṣas, are ruled over by Kubera, but are also said to be his most trusted helpers. | Another term for the yakṣa subjects of Kubera.| Another term for the yakṣa subjects of Kubera. |A class of devas that, like the yakṣas, are ruled over by Kubera, but are also said to be his most trusted helpers. 
གསང-བ-པ	 A type of semi-divine being frequently found in the entourage of Kubera, the lord of wealth. | Attendants of Kubera, the god of wealth, and the guardians of his treasures. They live in the Himalayas at the source of the Ganges on the mountain that has been identified with Kailash.| Attendants of Kubera, the god of wealth, and the guardians of his treasures. They live in the Himalayas at the source of the Ganges on the mountain that has been identified with Kailash. |A type of semi-divine being frequently found in the entourage of Kubera, the lord of wealth. 
འབྲོག-གནས	 A yakṣa.|A yakṣa. 
ཧ-ཧ-ཞེས-འབོད-པ	 The first of the eight cold hells, named after the cries of the beings within it.|The first of the eight cold hells, named after the cries of the beings within it. 
དབུ-སྐྲ-མཐོན-ཏིང-ལ-འཇམ-ཞིང-རིང-བ	Seventy-second of the eighty minor marks.
དབུ-སྐྲ-མ-འཛིངས-པ	Seventy-fifth of the eighty minor marks.
དབུ-སྐྲ-མ-འཁྲུགས-པ	Seventy-third of the eighty minor marks.
མཛོད-སྤུ-སྨིན-མཚམས-སུ-འཁྲུངས	Thirty-first or thirty-second of the thirty-two major marks.
དབུ-སྐྲ-གྱེན-དུ-ཕྱོགས-ཤིང-བཟང-ལ-ལྕང-ལོར-འཁྱིལ-བ	Seventy-fourth of the eighty minor marks.
སྤུ-རེ-རེ-ནས-མཛེས-པར-སྐྱེས-ཤིང-གཡས-སུ-འཁྱིལ-པ	Eleventh of the thirty-two major marks.
ཧ-ལ-ཧ-ལ	 A species of snake, or the poison from this snake. | Indian plant; a deadly poison.| Indian plant; a deadly poison. |A species of snake, or the poison from this snake. 
ཁང-བཟངས	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. Also estate.
ཁང-པ-བརྩེགས-པ	 An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. Also, terraced cottage, tower, pavilion, penthouse, etc. | Distinctive Indian assembly hall or temple with one ground-floor room and a high ornamental roof, sometimes a barrel shape with apses but more usually a tapering roof, tower, or spire, containing at least one additional upper room within the structure. Kūṭāgāra literally means “upper chamber” and is short for kūṭāgāraśala, “hall with an upper chamber or chambers.” The Mahābodhi Temple in Bodhgaya is an example of a kūṭāgāra.| Distinctive Indian assembly hall or temple with one ground-floor room and a high ornamental roof, sometimes a barrel shape with apses but more usually a tapering roof, tower, or spire, containing at least one additional upper room within the structure. Kūṭāgāra literally means “upper chamber” and is short for kūṭāgāraśala, “hall with an upper chamber or chambers.” The Mahābodhi Temple in Bodhgaya is an example of a kūṭāgāra. | Distinctive Indian assembly hall or temple with one ground-floor room and a high ornamental roof, sometimes a barrel shape with apses but more usually a tapering roof, tower, or spire, containing at least one additional upper room within the structure. Kūṭāgāra literally means “upper chamber” and is short for kūṭāgāraśala, “hall with an upper chamber or chambers.” The Mahābodhi temple in Bodhgaya is an example of a kūṭāgāra. |Distinctive Indian assembly hall or temple with one ground-floor room and a high ornamental roof, sometimes a barrel shape with apses but more usually a tapering roof, tower, or spire, containing at least one additional upper room within the structure. Kūṭāgāra literally means “upper chamber” and is short for kūṭāgāraśala, “hall with an upper chamber or chambers.” The Mahābodhi Temple in Bodhgaya is an example of a kūṭāgāra. 
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-འཇམ-ཞིང-གཞོན-ཤ-ཆགས-པ	Third of the thirty-two major marks.\nhands and feet that are tender and soft\npalms and soles that are tender and soft
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-ཡོངས-སུ-དག-པ	 Sixty-second of the eighty minor marks.|Sixty-second of the eighty minor marks. 
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-དྲ-བ-དང-ལྡན-པ	Fifth of the thirty-two major marks.
བདེ-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Second of the four misconceptions.|Second of the four misconceptions. 
འཕྲོག-མ	 A rākṣasī with hundreds of children that the Buddha converted into a protector of children. There is a temple specifically for her in Kathmandu.| A rākṣasī with hundreds of children that the Buddha converted into a protector of children. There is a temple specifically for her in Kathmandu. | A yakṣiṇī; after conversion to Buddhadharma she became the protectress of children. |A yakṣiṇī; after conversion to Buddhadharma she became the protectress of children. 
སེང-གེ-བཟང-པོ	 Indian commentator (fl. late eighth century).|Indian commentator (fl. late eighth century). 
གནོད-སེམས	 Maliciousness, malevolence, vindictiveness. | Second of the five obscurations. Also translated here as “malice.” | Second of the five obscurations; ninth of the ten non-virtuous actions; second of the four knots. Also translated here as “harmful intention.”|Second of the five obscurations. Also translated here as “malice.” 
དོན-མཐུན-པ	Fourth of the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva.
ལག-པ	 Hand (body part); cubit (unit of length); the eleventh (sometimes thirteenth) lunar asterism.|Hand (body part); cubit (unit of length); the eleventh (sometimes thirteenth) lunar asterism. 
ཞེ-སྡང	Second of the five fetters associated with the lower realms; one of the three poisons ({dug gsum}) which, along with desire and delusion, perpetuate the sufferings of cyclic existence. In its subtle manifestation as aversion it obstructs the correct perception of forms, and in its extreme manifestation as hatred and fear, it is characteristic of the hells.
ཞེ-སྡང-རྡོ-རྗེ-མ	 Consort of Black ‌Acala.|Consort of Black ‌Acala. 
སྔོན-དུ-འགྲོ	 Also translated here as “have primacy.”\npreceded|Also translated here as “precede.”\nhas primacy\nhave primacy 
མི-འཇིགས-པ-སྦྱིན-པ	An epithet for Avalokiteśvara.
རིན-ཆེན-བཀོད-པའི-རྒྱ-མཚོ-བློ-གྲོས	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
དབུ-གདུགས-འདྲ-བ	 Forty-fifth of the eighty minor marks.|Forty-fifth of the eighty minor marks. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-བརྩེགས-པ	 A collection of texts comprising a section of the Kangyur as well as of the Chinese Buddhist canon. See the http://read.84000.co/section/O1JC114941JC14667.html#summary tab notes for details.| A collection of texts comprising a section of the Kangyur as well as of the Chinese Buddhist canon. See the http://read.84000.co/section/O1JC114941JC14667.html#summary tab notes for details. |A collection of texts comprising a section of the Kangyur as well as of the Chinese Buddhist canon. See the http://read.84000.co/section/O1JC114941JC14667.html#summary tab notes for details. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པའི-སྡེ-ཀོན-མཆོག-བརྩེགས-པའི-མདོ	 This could refer to the Ratnakūṭa collection of sūtras as it is known in the Kangyur and Chinese canons; however, as the collection is not known to have existed, as such, in earlier times, this could also be either a general term covering Mahāyāna sūtras as a category, or a synonym for the Kāśyapa­parivarta.| This could refer to the Ratnakūṭa collection of sūtras as it is known in the Kangyur and Chinese canons; however, as the collection is not known to have existed, as such, in earlier times, this could also be either a general term covering Mahāyāna sūtras as a category, or a synonym for the Kāśyapa­parivarta. |This could refer to the Ratnakūṭa collection of sūtras as it is known in the Kangyur and Chinese canons; however, as the collection is not known to have existed, as such, in earlier times, this could also be either a general term covering Mahāyāna sūtras as a category, or a synonym for the Kāśyapa­parivarta. 
ཉན-ཐོས	 A follower of the early teachings of the Buddha, focusing on the monastic lifestyle. Also translated as "listener."\nListener | A follower of those teachings of the Buddha that focus on the monastic lifestyle and liberating oneself from suffering, in contrasted to followers of the bodhisattva vehicle who seek buddhahood for the sake of all beings. | Disciples who heard the Buddha’s doctrine from his own lips; followers of the Hīnayāna school in general. | Hearer. | Hīnayāna practitioner of the first turning of the wheel of the Dharma on the four noble truths, who realizes the suffering inherent in saṃsāra and focuses on understanding that there is no independent self. By conquering disturbing emotions, he liberates himself, attaining first the stage of stream enterer at the path of seeing, followed by the stage of once-returner who will be reborn only one more time, and then the stage of non-returner who will no longer be reborn into saṃsāra. The final goal is to become an arhat. These four stages are also known as the “four results of spiritual practice.” | Lit. “listener.” Disciple of the Buddha and follower of the Hinayāna teaching. | Primarily referring to those disciples of the Buddha who aspire to attain the state of an arhat by seeking self liberation. It is usually defined as “those who hear the teaching from the Buddha and make it heard to others.” | Someone who practices according to the Vehicle of the Hearers (those who hear the teachings from others); or, someone who heard the Dharma from the Buddha. | The disciples of the Buddha who followed the Lesser Vehicle (Hīnayāna). A śrāvaka is explained as someone who hears the teachings and then proclaims them to others.\nĀryaśrāvaka| The disciples of the Buddha who followed the Lesser Vehicle (Hīnayāna). A śrāvaka is explained as someone who hears the teachings and then proclaims them to others.\nĀryaśrāvaka | The pious attendants heeding the words spoken by Lord Buddha, contrasted in terms of their realization with both pratyekabuddhas and bodhisattvas (See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8). | The word, based on the verb “to hear,” means disciple, and is used in that general way, as well as for those who were followers of the non-Mahāyāna tradition of Buddhism, in contrast to the bodhisattvas. | This term, based on the verb to hear, means “disciple,” and is used in that general way, as well as for those who were followers of the non-Mahāyāna tradition of Buddhism, in contrast to the bodhisattvas.\nśrāvakas |A follower of the early teachings of the Buddha, focusing on the monastic lifestyle. Also translated as "listener."\nListener 
ཐུགས-ཀར-དཔལ-གྱི-བེའུས-ལེགས-པར-བརྒྱན-པ	 Seventy-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nhearts are excellently adorned with the śrīvatsa motif| Seventy-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nhearts are excellently adorned with the śrīvatsa motif |Seventy-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nhearts are excellently adorned with the śrīvatsa motif 
འཐབ-བྲལ	 The lowest of the heavenly realms. Characterized by freedom from difficulty. | The third (fourth highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm.| The third (fourth highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm. | The third lowest of the six heavens of the desire realm. | Third (counting from the lowest) of the six paradises in the desire realm. | Third god realm of desire, meaning “strifeless.” |The lowest of the heavenly realms. Characterized by freedom from difficulty. 
དགའ-ལྡན	 A heaven, the fourth level of the heavens of the realm of desire, and the last stopping place of a Buddha before his descent and reincarnation on earth; at present the abode of the future Buddha Maitreya. | Fourth god realm of desire, meaning “joyful.” | The fourth (counting from the lowest) of the six paradises in the desire realm. | The fourth (counting from the lowest) of the six paradises in the desire realm. The paradise from which Śākyamuni descended to be born into his world. | The fourth (third highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm.| The fourth (third highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm. | The third highest of the six heavens of the desire realm. |The third highest of the six heavens of the desire realm. 
གཞན-འཕྲུལ-དབང-བྱེད-པ	The highest of the six heavens of the desire realm.
སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-གསུམ	 Indra’s paradise on the summit of Sumeru.| Indra’s paradise on the summit of Sumeru. | The second lowest of the six heavens of the desire realm. |The second lowest of the six heavens of the desire realm. 
སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-གསུམ-པ	 Second god realm of desire, abode of the thirty-three gods.| Second god realm of desire, abode of the thirty-three gods. | The Heaven of the “Thirty-Three,” second level of the desire-realm, located on top of Mount Sumeru in the Buddhist cosmology. | The paradise of Indra on the summit of Sumeru, where there are thirty-three leading deities, hence the name “thirty-three.” The second (counting from the lowest) of the six paradises in the desire realm. | The paradise on the summit of Sumeru. | The second (fifth highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm. |The second (fifth highest) of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm. 
གཞང-འབྲུམ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཤ-ནའི-རས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཟླ-བ-ཕྱེད-པའི-མ-ནིང	 Someone who is female for half of the month and then becomes male for the other half; someone who is stricken with female desires for half of the month and male desires for the other half; or someone impotent for half of the month. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order.|Someone who is female for half of the month and then becomes male for the other half; someone who is stricken with female desires for half of the month and male desires for the other half; or someone impotent for half of the month. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order. 
དྲང-སྲོང	 An ancient Indian spiritual title especially for divinely inspired individuals credited with creating the foundations for all Indian culture. | Indian sage, wise man (often a wandering ascetic or hermit).| Sage. An ancient Indian spiritual title especially for divinely inspired individuals credited with creating the foundations for all Indian culture. |A seer or hermit who has attained certain spiritual powers.\nhermits 
དཔའ-བོ-གཅིག-པོ	 Male deity visualized with a consort, but without the maṇḍala deities.| Male deity visualized with a consort, but without the maṇḍala deities. |Male deity visualized with a consort, but without the maṇḍala deities. 
དཔའ-བོ-གཅིག-པ	 Another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa; he is called “sole” because, apart from his consort, he is not accompanied by the deities of the maṇḍala.| Another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa; he is called “sole” because, apart from his consort, he is not accompanied by the deities of the maṇḍala. |Another name for Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa; he is called “sole” because, apart from his consort, he is not accompanied by the deities of the maṇḍala. 
ཧེ-རུ-ཀ	 The wrathful form of Akṣobhya, buddha of the vajra family, who appears in the center of many tantric maṇḍalas. He is typicaly depicted wearing mortuary implements and wreathed in flame.|The wrathful form of Akṣobhya, buddha of the vajra family, who appears in the center of many tantric maṇḍalas. He is typicaly depicted wearing mortuary implements and wreathed in flame. 
ཐེ-ཚོམ	Fifth of the five obscurations; second of the three fetters; and fifth of the five fetters associated with the lower realms.
སྐྱིགས-བུ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ལྷག-པའི-བསམ-པ	 This is a stage in the conception or initiation of the spirit‌ of enlightenment‌. It follows upon the positive thought, or aspiration to attain it, wherein the bodhisattva becomes filled with a lofty determination that he himself should attain enlightenment, that it is the only thing to do to solve his own problems as well as those of all living beings. This high resolve reaches its most intense purity when the bodhisattva simultaneously attains the Path of Insight and the first bodhisattva-stage, the Stage of Joy. The translation follows Lamotte’s happy coinage “haute résolution.”|This is a stage in the conception or initiation of the spirit‌ of enlightenment‌. It follows upon the positive thought, or aspiration to attain it, wherein the bodhisattva becomes filled with a lofty determination that he himself should attain enlightenment, that it is the only thing to do to solve his own problems as well as those of all living beings. This high resolve reaches its most intense purity when the bodhisattva simultaneously attains the Path of Insight and the first bodhisattva-stage, the Stage of Joy. The translation follows Lamotte’s happy coinage “haute résolution.” 
མཐོ-རིས	The auspicious realms of rebirth comprising the abodes of the gods, the domain of the antigods and the human world.
གཞན-འཕྲུལ-དབང-བྱེད-ཀྱི-ལྷ	The deities of this, the sixth level of the gods of the desire-realm, appropriate and enjoy the magical creations of others; hence their name, literally, “who assume control of the emanations of others.” Their abode contains all the wonders created elsewhere and is referred to as a standard of splendor.
ཁ-བ-ཅན-གྱི-རི	 Synonymous with Himavat. This “mountain” is actually the entire Himalayan range.|Synonymous with Himavat. This “mountain” is actually the entire Himalayan range. 
གངས-རི	 A mountain.|A mountain. 
གངས-ཀྱི-རི	 Synonymous with Himagiri. This “mountain” is actually the entire Himalayan range.|Synonymous with Himagiri. This “mountain” is actually the entire Himalayan range. 
ཧི-མ-ཀ-ལ	 Unidentified river, possibly the Kali Gandaki.|Unidentified river, possibly the Kali Gandaki. 
སྒྲིབ-པ	 In this sūtra it is stated that there are five obscurations. This must be referring to the list in the early Mahāyāna sūtra The Patience Trained by the Color of Space Sūtra: (1) desire’s craving; (2) malice; (3) dullness and sleepiness; (4) laziness and agitation; and (5) doubt.|See “five hindrances.” 
དེ-ལྟ-བྱུང	 Accounts of the lives of past buddhas and bodhisattvas. Literally “thus it has happened.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine.|Accounts of the lives of past buddhas and bodhisattvas. Literally “thus it has happened.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. 
པུ-ནར-པ	Boerhaavia diffusa.
རི-བོང-འཛིན-པ	An epithet of the moon.
མི-རྟག-པ-ལ-རྟག-པར-འཛིན-པ	 Fourth of the four misconceptions.|Fourth of the four misconceptions. 
བདག-མེད-པ-ལ-བདག-ཏུ-འཛིན-པ	 Second of the four misconceptions.| Second of the four misconceptions. |Second of the four misconceptions. 
གསོབ	hollowness
ཚངས-སྤྱོད	 A euphemism for celibacy.|A euphemism for celibacy. 
སྦྲང-རྩི	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. Also used to translate the Sanskrit “madhu.”
ཁང-པ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཁྱིམ-བདག-གི-རིགས	 A subdivision of the vaiśya (mercantile) class of traditional Indian society.|A subdivision of the vaiśya (mercantile) class of traditional Indian society. 
སྣུམ-ཆེན-པོ	In this context, a ritual object used in rituals of enthrallment.
སྒུར-པོ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
བྱེ-བ-ཁྲག-ཁྲིག-འབུམ	 The expression koṭi­niyuta­lakṣa ({bye ba khrag khrig 'bum}) is equivalent to 1 to the power of 23, i.e., one hundred billion trillion.\nhundreds of billion trillions|The expression koṭi­niyuta­lakṣa ({bye ba khrag khrig 'bum}) is equivalent to 1 to the power of 23, i.e., one hundred billion trillion.\nhundreds of billion trillions 
ལོ-མའི-སྤྱིལ-བུ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བདག	 Also translated here as “I.”| Also translated here as “self.”\n‘I’\n‘I.’\n‘I,’\n“I.”\n“I,” | It is crucial to understand what is meant by “self,” before one is able to realize the all-important “absence of self.” Before we can discover an absence, we have to know what we are looking for. In Mahāyāna, there is a self of persons and a self of things, both presumed habitually by living beings and hence informative of their perceptions. Were these “selves” to exist as they appear because of our presumption, they should exist as substantial, self-subsistent entities within things, or as the intrinsic realities of things, or as the intrinsic identities of things, all permanent, unrelated and unrelative, etc. The nondiscovery of such “selves” within changing, relative, interdependent persons and things is the realization of ultimate reality, or absence of self. |Also translated here as “self.”\n‘I’\n‘I.’\n‘I,’\n“I.”\n“I,” 
གཎྜྰི	 An elongated, shoulder-held wooden bar (or beam) struck with a wooden striker to call the saṅgha community to assembly.| An elongated, shoulder-held wooden bar (or beam) struck with a wooden striker to call the saṅgha community to assembly. |An elongated, shoulder-held wooden bar (or beam) struck with a wooden striker to call the saṅgha community to assembly. 
གཎ-ཌྰི	 An elongated, shoulder-held wooden bar (or beam) struck with a wooden striker to call the saṅgha community to assembly.| An elongated, shoulder-held wooden bar (or beam) struck with a wooden striker to call the saṅgha community to assembly. |An elongated, shoulder-held wooden bar (or beam) struck with a wooden striker to call the saṅgha community to assembly. 
བདག-ཏུ-འདུ-ཤེས	 Third of the four misconceptions; the mistaken notion of a self existing independent of the five psycho-physical aggregates.\nnotions of self\nnotions of “I”\nnotions of “I”\nnotions of ‘I’\nnotions of ‘I’\nnotion that there is a self| Third of the four misconceptions; the mistaken notion of a self existing independent of the five psycho-physical aggregates.\nnotions of self\nnotions of “I”\nnotions of “I”\nnotions of ‘I’\nnotions of ‘I’\nnotion that there is a self |Third of the four misconceptions; the mistaken notion of a self existing independent of the five psycho-physical aggregates.\nnotions of self\nnotions of “I”\nnotions of “I”\nnotions of ‘I’\nnotions of ‘I’\nnotion that there is a self 
ང-ཟག-པ-ཟད-པ-དོ	 Second of the Buddha’s four assurances.|Second of the Buddha’s four assurances. 
རྟོག-པ-དང-བཅས-དཔྱོད-པ-དང-བཅས-པའི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 First of the three meditative stabilities.| First of the three meditative stabilities. |First of the three meditative stabilities. 
རྟོག-པ-མེད-ལ-དཔྱོད-པ-ཙམ-གྱི-ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན	 Second of the three meditative stabilities. | Third of the three meditative stabilities.| Third of the three meditative stabilities. |Second of the three meditative stabilities. 
རང-བཞིན	 This term denotes the ontological status of phenomena, according to which they are attributed with existence in their own right, inherently, in and of themselves, objectively, and independent of any other phenomena such as our conception and labelling. The absence of such an ontological reality is defined as the true nature of reality, emptiness. | “According to Sāṁkhya, the prime substance, from which the material universe evolves, as opposed to puruṣa, pure consciousness.” (Reat, 39 n5).\nprimal matter| “According to Sāṁkhya, the prime substance, from which the material universe evolves, as opposed to puruṣa, pure consciousness.” (Reat, 39 n5).\nprimal matter |Svabhāva is usually rendered as “self-nature,” sometimes as “own-being,” both of which have a certain literal validity. However, neither artificial term has any evocative power for the reader who has no familiarity with the original, and a term must be found that the reader can immediately relate to his own world to fulfill the function the original word had in its world. In our world of identities (national, racial, religious, personal, sexual, etc.), “identity” is a part of our makeup; thus, when we are taught the ultimate absence of identity of all persons and things, it is easy to “identify” what is supposedly absent and hence to try to understand what that entails.\nidentities 
གང-ཟག	 Also translated as “individual” or “person.”| Also translated as “individual” or “personal identity.” | Also translated as “person” or “personal identity.” | individual |Also translated as “individual” or “person.” 
གང-ཟག-ལ-བདག-མེད-པར-ཕྱོགས-གཅིག-ཤེས-པ	 Selflessness in this context‌ implies the lack of inherent existence in personal identity and also in physical and mental phenomena. Śrāvakas are said to expound the doctrine of selflessness only in terms of the absence of personal identity, while pratyekabuddhas additionally realize the emptiness of external phenomena, composed of atomic particles. However, unlike bodhisattvas they do not realize that the internal phenomena of consciousness too are without inherent existence.| Selflessness in this context‌ implies the lack of inherent existence in personal identity and also in physical and mental phenomena. Śrāvakas are said to expound the doctrine of selflessness only in terms of the absence of personal identity, while pratyekabuddhas additionally realize the emptiness of external phenomena, composed of atomic particles. However, unlike bodhisattvas they do not realize that the internal phenomena of consciousness too are without inherent existence. |Selflessness in this context‌ implies the lack of inherent existence in personal identity and also in physical and mental phenomena. Śrāvakas are said to expound the doctrine of selflessness only in terms of the absence of personal identity, while pratyekabuddhas additionally realize the emptiness of external phenomena, composed of atomic particles. However, unlike bodhisattvas they do not realize that the internal phenomena of consciousness too are without inherent existence. 
བུ-རམ-ཤིང	 This is a family lineage that many royal families claimed adherence to. It is the name of an early royal dynasty in India, which is said to be a solar dynasty. Though there are many versions of how the dynasty received its name, they all relate it to the sugar cane (ikṣu). In Buddhism he was said to have been miraculously born from the rishi Gautama’s semen and blood when it was heated by the sun, and subsequently hid among sugar cane. Buddha Śākyamuni was also considered to be in this family line.|This is a family lineage that many royal families claimed adherence to. It is the name of an early royal dynasty in India, which is said to be a solar dynasty. Though there are many versions of how the dynasty received its name, they all relate it to the sugar cane (ikṣu). In Buddhism he was said to have been miraculously born from the rishi Gautama’s semen and blood when it was heated by the sun, and subsequently hid among sugar cane. Buddha Śākyamuni was also considered to be in this family line. 
ཁ-དོག-ངན-པ	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. In this case, a “fitting color” has equal shades of blue, yellow, and saffron while “ill-colored” means exclusively blue, yellow, or saffron.
སྣང-བ-བྱེད-པ	 Name of the thirty-sixth meditative stability.|Name of the forty-ninth meditative stability. 
རྣམ-པར-སྣང-བ	 Name of the thirtieth meditative stability.|Name of the thirtieth meditative stability. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-སྣང-བ	 Kauṇḍinya’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future. It will also be the name of five hundred of Śākyamuni’s arhats when they attain buddhahood. Also called “Samanta­prabhāsa” and “Samanta­prabha.” | Name of the fifty-third meditative stability.|Name of the fifty-third meditative stability. 
རབ-ཏུ-སྣང-བའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of a tathāgata.|Realm of a tathāgata. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-ཐམས-ཅད-ལ-འོད-བྱེད-པ	 Name of the 103rd meditative stability; could also be translated “Illuminator in all Respects.”|Name of the 103rd meditative stability; could also be translated “Illuminator in all Respects.” 
སྒྱུ-མ	 Also translated here as “illusion.”|Also translated here as “magical display.” 
སྒྲ-བསྒྲགས-པ-ལ-འཇུག-པ	Name of the ninety-seventh meditative stability.
འོད-དྲི-མ-མེད-པ	 Name of the ninety-ninth meditative stability.| Name of the ninety-ninth meditative stability. | Name of the thirty-eighth meditative stability. |Name of the thirty-eighth meditative stability. 
སྐྱོན	This term suggests rawness—something that is uncooked, unrefined, and flawed—while “maturity” (niyāma, {skyon ma mchis pa}) implies certitude, refinement, cooking, softening, and flawlessness.
འགྲིབ-པ-མེད-པ	imperishability
མི-རྟག-པ	 impermanence|impermanence 
མི-རྟག-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 First of the six aspects of perception.| First of the six aspects of perception. |First of the six aspects of perception. 
གླགས	(in the expressions ava­tāra na labhate, {glags mi rnyed}, “no opportunity for … to impinge upon …”).\nto impinge upon
རྐུ-ཐབས-སུ-གནས-པ	Someone who pretends to have been ordained though they have not. One class of person barred from joining the renunciate order.
སྐོམ-གྱི-གཙང-སྦྱོར	One of several official administrative or managerial positions at a monastery.
ཐ-དད-དུ-གནས-པ	 “Detachment.” The name of an eon in the distant past.| “Detachment.” The name of an eon in the distant past. |The quality of someone who has done something to be removed from a monastery or harbored intentions that contradict the Dharma. 
བྱ-བ-མེད-པ	Inaction here implies the mistaken view that, owing to emptiness, engagement in virtous acts is to be avoided.
མངོན-པར-བསྔགས	To imbue something with power by reciting the mantra over it.
མི-དམིགས-པ	 This refers to the mental openness cultivated by the bodhisattva who has reached a certain awareness of the nature of reality, in that he does not seek to perceive or apprehend any object or grasp any substance in anything; rather, he removes any static pretension of his mind to have grasped at any truth, conviction, or view (see also “incomprehensibility”).\n(See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-986).|This refers to the ultimate nature of things, which cannot be comprehended, grasped, etc., by the ordinary, conditioned, subjective mind. Hence it is significant that the realization of this nature is not couched in terms of understanding, or conviction, but in terms of tolerance (kṣānti, see “tolerance”), as the grasping mind cannot grasp its ultimate inability to grasp; it can only cultivate its tolerance of that inability. 
བསམ-གྱིས-མི-ཁྱབ-པ	Lit. “unthinkability,” (on the part of a mind whose thinking is conditioned and bound by conceptual terms). This is essentially synonymous with “incomprehensibility” (see entry).
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པ-བསམ-གྱིས-མི-ཁྱབ-པ	 Inconceivable liberation of the bodhisattvas, a name of the Avataṃsaka, and a subtitle of the Vimala­kīrti­nirdeśa.| Inconceivable liberation of the bodhisattvas, a name of the Avataṃsaka, and a subtitle of the Vimala­kīrti­nirdeśa. |Inconceivable liberation of the bodhisattvas, a name of the Avataṃsaka, and a subtitle of the Vimala­kīrti­nirdeśa. 
ཞབས-ལོང-མོའི-ཚིགས-མི-མངོན-པ	Seventh of the thirty-two major marks.
རྡོ-རྗེའི-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར	 Name of the twenty-third meditative stability.|Name of the twenty-third meditative stability. 
ནཱ-ག-ད-མ-ན-ཀ	Sansevieria roxburghiana.
ཧ-སྟི-ཤུཎྚི	Heliotropium indicum (?)
སྒོག-སྐྱ	Heliotropium indicum.
གྷུཉྫ	Abrus precatorius.
ཨ-ཏི-བ-ལ	Abutilon indicum.
ཀ-ར-བཱི-ར	Nerium indicum.
ཚངས-མ	Bacopa monnieri.
ཛ-ཡན-ཏི	Sesbania sesban.
སྤང-སྤོས	Nardostachys jatamansi, Nardostachys grandiflora.
ཟའི-ལོ-མ	Traquia involucrata.
པུཎྜ-ཏ-ག-ར	 Valeriana wallichii (more likely), Tabernaemontana crispa (less likely).|Valeriana wallichii (more likely), Tabernaemontana crispa (less likely). 
རམས	Indigofera tinctoria.
བརྒྱ-བྱིན	 A divine being who rules the Heaven of the Thirty Three; equivalent to, or identified with, Indra. | A major god in the Vedic pantheon, he dwindled in importance after Vedism was transformed into Hinduism in the early A.D. centuries. However, he was reinstated in Buddhist sūtras as the king of the gods and as a disciple of the Buddha and protector of the Dharma and its practicers. | Alternate name for Indra, the king of the gods in Hindu mythology. | Chief of the gods of the Thirty-Three, who presides over the desire realm heaven. | Epithet of Indra. Literally, “he who contains one hundred sacrificial rites.”| Epithet of Indra. Literally, “he who contains one hundred sacrificial rites.” | In Buddhist texts, usual name for Indra, king of gods of the desire-realm (kāmadhātu) of a particular universe; hence a Śakra is lower in status than a Brahmā, who resides at the summit of the realm of pure matter (rūpadhātu). As in the case of Brahmā, a title, or status, rather than a personal name; each universe has its Śakra. | Literally, “The one who performed a hundred offerings.” Name of Indra. | More commonly known in the West as Indra, the deity that is called “lord of the devas,” dwells on the summit of Mount Sumeru, and wields the thunderbolt. The Tibetan translation is based on an etymology that śakra is an abbreviation of śata-kratu: one who has performed a hundred sacrifices. The highest Vedic sacrifice was the horse sacrifice, and there is a tradition that he became the lord of the gods through performing them. | More commonly known in the West as Indra, the deity that is called “lord of the devas” dwells on the summit of Mount Sumeru and wields the thunderbolt. The Tibetan translation is based on an etymology that śakra is an abbreviation of śata-kratu, one who has performed a hundred sacrifices. The highest vedic sacrifice was the horse sacrifice, and there is a tradition that he became the lord of the gods through performing them. Each world with a central Sumeru has a Śakra; therefore this sutra mentions them in the plural. | More commonly known in the West as Indra, the deity who is called “lord of the devas” and dwells on the summit of Mount Sumeru and wields the thunderbolt. The Tibetan translation is based on an etymology that śakra is an abbreviation of śata-kratu, “one who has performed a hundred sacrifices.” The highest vedic sacrifice was the horse sacrifice and there is a tradition that he became the lord of the gods through performing them. | Name of a god (deva), also known as “Indra.” | Name of the god who rules the Heaven of the Thirty-Three. | One of the chief Vedic deities. God of war and Lord of heaven. | One of the names of Indra. | One of the principal Hindu gods, the leader of the gods of the realm of Thirty-Three. | The lord of the gods of the Thirty-Three. |A major god in the Vedic pantheon, he dwindled in importance after Vedism was transformed into Hinduism in the early A.D. centuries. However, he was reinstated in Buddhist sūtras as the king of the gods and as a disciple of the Buddha and protector of the Dharma and its practicers. 
དབང-པོ	 A bodhisattva.| Name of a god (deva), epithet of Śakra. | The lord of the devas, the principal deity in the Vedas. Indra and Brahmā were the two most important deities in the Buddha’s lifetime, and were later eclipsed by the increasing importance of Śiva and Viṣṇu. |The lord of the devas, the principal deity in the Vedas. Indra and Brahmā were the two most important deities in the Buddha’s lifetime, and were later eclipsed by the increasing importance of Śiva and Viṣṇu. 
ཨར-མོ-ནིག-ལྟ-བུའི-རྡོ-ལེབ	 A huge flat rock, Indra’s throne in the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods; it is called Pāṇḍukambala, “like a blanket,” because it is made of a pale stone reminiscent of thick wollen cloth. Sakaki 7127 in the Mahāvyutpatti.|A huge flat rock, Indra’s throne in the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods; it is called Pāṇḍukambala, “like a blanket,” because it is made of a pale stone reminiscent of thick wollen cloth. Sakaki 7127 in the Mahāvyutpatti. 
དབང-ཆེན-གྱི-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར	 A rainbow.| A rainbow. |A rainbow. 
དབང-པོས-བྱིན	 Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. | One of “the sixteen excellent men.” |One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
དབང-པོའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 A buddha in the southwestern direction.|A buddha in the southwestern direction. 
མིག-འཕྲུལ	 Traditional Brahmanical term for the illusory structure of mundane reality.|Traditional Brahmanical term for the illusory structure of mundane reality. 
དབང-པོའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
དབང-ཏོག-རྒྱལ-མཚན-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha in the distant past, who is not mentioned in any other sūtra.|A buddha in the distant past, who is not mentioned in any other sūtra. 
རྣམ-པ-ཟད-མི-ཤེས-པ	Name of the ninety-fourth meditative stability.
མཐའ-ཡས-པ	 Also translated here as “infinite.”|Also translated here as “limitless.” 
མཐར-ཐུག-པ-མེད-པ	Also translated here as “limitless.”
མཐའ-ཡས-པའི-ཡོན-ཏན-གྱི-འོད-ཟེར	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
ལྷན-ཅིག-སྐྱེས-པའི-དགའ-བ	 The third of the four types of joy.| The third of the four types of joy. |The third of the four types of joy. 
ལྷག-མཐོང	 Insight meditation. | The first of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh.| The first of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh. | The second of the two main branches of Buddhist meditation, aiming at developing insight into the nature of reality. | This is paired with “mental quiescence” (see entry). In general “meditation” is too often understood as only the types of practices categorized as “quietistic”—which eschew objects, learning, analysis, discrimination, etc., and lead only to the attainment of temporary peace and one-pointedness. However, in order to reach any high realization, such as the absence of a personal self, the absence of a self in phenomena, or voidness, “transcendental analysis,” with its analytical penetration to the nature of ultimate reality, is indispensable. The analysis is called “transcendental” because it does not accept anything it sees as it appears. Instead, through analytic examination, it penetrates to its deeper reality, going ever deeper in infinite penetration until tolerance is reached. All apparently self-sufficient objects are seen through and their truth-status is rejected—first conceptually and finally perceptually, at buddhahood. Thus “meditation,” to be efficacious, must include both mental quiescence (śamatha), and transcendental analysis (vipaśyana) in integrated combination. |The second of the two main branches of Buddhist meditation, aiming at developing insight into the nature of reality. 
དཀར-པོ-རྣམ-པར-མཐོང-བའི-ས	 Name of the first level to be acquired by bodhisattvas.|Name of the first level to be acquired by bodhisattvas. 
མཐོང-བའི-ས	 Name of the fourth level of realization attainable by bodhisattvas, equivalent to entering the stream to nirvāṇa. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.|Name of the fourth level of realization attainable by bodhisattvas, equivalent to entering the stream to nirvāṇa. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282. 
མཐོང-ལམ	 Third of the five paths, preceded by the paths of provisions, and connection, and followed by the paths of cultivation and no-more-learning. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.|Third of the five paths, preceded by the paths of provisions, and connection, and followed by the paths of cultivation and no-more-learning. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282. 
བག-ཆགས	The subconscious tendencies and predilections of the psychosomatic conglomerate. This most obvious word is seldom used in this context because of the hesitancy of scholars to employ “scientific” terminology.
བག-ལ-ཉལ-བ	 This is equivalent to vāsanā, “instinctual predilection,” and refers in Buddhist psychology to the subconscious habit patterns that underlie emotional responses such as desire and hatred.|This is equivalent to vāsanā, “instinctual predilection,” and refers in Buddhist psychology to the subconscious habit patterns that underlie emotional responses such as desire and hatred. 
སེམས-ཅན-རྣམས-ལ-རྗེས-སུ-སྟོན-པར-མཛད	Sixty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.
ཀློག-གི-སློབ-དཔོན	 A monk who teaches another to recite even a single verse. One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.|A monk who teaches another to recite even a single verse. One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor. 
གནས-ཀྱི-སློབ-དཔོན	 Newly ordained monks are not allowed to live independently until they have passed ten years as a monk and possess one of twenty-one sets of five qualities described in “The Chapter on Going Forth.” Until that time, they are obliged to live as wards of or apprentices to a reliable instructor so that they may learn and become reliable in the conduct expected of a Buddhist renunciate.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1229.| Newly ordained monks are not allowed to live independently until they have passed ten years as a monk and possess one of twenty-one sets of five qualities described in “The Chapter on Going Forth.” Until that time, they are obliged to live as wards of or apprentices to a reliable instructor so that they may learn and become reliable in the conduct expected of a Buddhist renunciate.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1229. |Newly ordained monks are not allowed to live independently until they have passed ten years as a monk and possess one of twenty-one sets of five qualities described in “The Chapter on Going Forth.” Until that time, they are obliged to live as wards of or apprentices to a reliable instructor so that they may learn and become reliable in the conduct expected of a Buddhist renunciate.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1229. 
དགེ-ཚུལ-གྱི-སློབ-དཔོན	 An instructor who grants refuge and the novice precepts. One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.\ninstructors of novices|An instructor who grants refuge and the novice precepts. One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.\ninstructors of novices 
གསང-སྟེ-སྟོན-པ	 One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.\ninstructor who inquire into confidential matters\ninstructors who inquire into confidential matters\ninstructors who inquires into confidential matters| One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.\ninstructor who inquire into confidential matters\ninstructors who inquire into confidential matters\ninstructors who inquires into confidential matters |One of five types of instructors named by the Buddha when asked to elaborate on the role of an instructor.\ninstructor who inquire into confidential matters\ninstructors who inquire into confidential matters\ninstructors who inquires into confidential matters 
གཟུངས-ཀྱི-བློ-གྲོས	 Name of the ninety-fifth meditative stability.|Name of the ninety-fifth meditative stability. 
དཔལ-དང-བློ-གྲོས	 Nineteenth of the eighty minor marks.|Nineteenth of the eighty minor marks. 
ཐམས-ཅད-མཁྱེན-པའི-བློ-གྲོས-འོད-ཟེར-གྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
མོས-པ	 Also translated here as “inclination,” “will,” and “intent.”|Also translated here as “inclination,” “will,” and “volition.” 
མོས	 be intent\nare intent\nis intent| be intent\nare intent\nis intent |be intent\nare intent\nis intent 
དྲང-དོན	See “definitive meaning.”\ninterpretable in meaning
ཤིན-ཏུ-སྦྱང-དཀའ-བ	The fifth bodhisattva level.
འཕྲལ-ལ-བོས-པ	To be invited to eat on a whim is an acceptable way to receive food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
མགྲོན-དུ-བོས-པ	Food served at a banquet to which one has been invited is an acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཉིང-མཚམས-སྦྱོར-བ	The rebirth process that is maintained and perpetuated on the basis of past actions.
བག-ཆགས-དང-མཚམས-སྦྱོར	 The mundane process of rebirth within cyclic existence, impelled by the propensities of past actions.|The mundane process of rebirth within cyclic existence, impelled by the propensities of past actions. 
བག-ཆགས-ཀྱི-མཚམས-སྦྱོར	 The mundane process of rebirth within cyclic existence, impelled by the propensities of past actions.|The mundane process of rebirth within cyclic existence, impelled by the propensities of past actions. 
ཀེ-ས-ར	Mesua ferrea, specifically “Ceylon ironwood,” also called Indian rose chestnut, Cobra’s saffron, and nāgakesara. The flowers are large and fragrant, with four white petals and a yellow center.
ངག-བཀྱལ-བ	Seventh of ten non-virtuous actions.
ཕྱིར-མི-ལྡོག-པ-ཉིད	A stage in the bodhisattva path where the practitioner will never turn back.
ཕྱིར-མི-ལྡོག-པ	 The third stage on the path to arhat-ship; a non-returner who will no longer be reborn into saṃsāra.| irreversibility |irreversibility 
གཤོལ-མདའ-འཛིན	 Name of a class of gods, as well as one of the ranges of mountains around Sumeru.|Name of a class of gods, as well as one of the ranges of mountains around Sumeru. 
དབང-ཕྱུག	 Literally “lord,” this term is an epithet for the god Śiva, but functions more generally in Buddhist texts as a generalized “supreme being” to whom the creation of the universe is attributed. | One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. | One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. Often synonymous with Maheśvara, though sometimes presented as separate deities. | One of the principal three Hindu gods.| One of the principal three Hindu gods. |One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. 
འདི-ལྟ-བུ-འདས-པ	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means accounts of the lives of past buddhas and bodhisattvas.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means accounts of the lives of past buddhas and bodhisattvas.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
ཅང-སྐྱེར	Holarrhena pubescens.
དུག-མོ-ཉུང	Holarrhena pubescens.
འགྲོ-བ-འཛིན	 A bodhisattva layman of Vaiśālī, who is saved by Vimalakīrti from being fooled by Māra posing as Indra. This bodhisattva is mentioned in Mvy, No. 728, and in the Rāṣṭra­pāla­paripṛccha (Toh 62, in the Ratnakūṭa; see Lamotte, p. 204, n. 120).|A bodhisattva layman of Vaiśālī, who is saved by Vimalakīrti from being fooled by Māra posing as Indra. This bodhisattva is mentioned in Mvy, No. 728, and in the Rāṣṭra­pāla­paripṛccha (Toh 62, in the Ratnakūṭa; see Lamotte, p. 204, n. 120). 
རྒྱལ-བྱེད	 A rishi of ancient India, who was said to have swallowed the Ganges when it first appeared, and then on being supplicated allowed it to come out of his ear.|A rishi of ancient India, who was said to have swallowed the Ganges when it first appeared, and then on being supplicated allowed it to come out of his ear. 
འཛའ-མན	 A rishi who was a pupil of Vyāsa, the first master of the Sāmaveda and the source of the Mīmāṃsā tradition. | Another name of Maudgalyāyana, one of the Buddha’s two principal pupils. Kolita was the name of his home village, or was (according to The Chapter on Going Forth) a name given by his relatives meaning “born from the lap” [of the gods].| Another name of Maudgalyāyana, one of the Buddha’s two principal pupils. Kolita was the name of his home village, or was (according to The Chapter on Going Forth) a name given by his relatives meaning “born from the lap” [of the gods]. |A rishi who was a pupil of Vyāsa, the first master of the Sāmaveda and the source of the Mīmāṃsā tradition. 
འབྲུག-སྒྲ-སྦྱངས-སྙན-སྐར-མའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-མེ-ཏོག-ཀུན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པ	 A buddha in the distant past. Also the name of a prince in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. Also the name of a prince in the distant past. 
དྲ-བ-ཅན-གྱི-འོད	Name of a tathāgata.
འཛའ-མག-ནི	 One of the seven great rishis of ancient India. Also known as the father of Paraśurāma, the sixth incarnation of Viṣṇu.|One of the seven great rishis of ancient India. Also known as the father of Paraśurāma, the sixth incarnation of Viṣṇu. 
རྨུགས-འཛིན	 An alternate name for the yakṣa Kubera.|An alternate name for the yakṣa Kubera. 
ཛམ-བྷ-ལ	 God of wealth.|God of wealth. 
འཛམ-བུ-ཆུ-བོ	 A divine river.|A divine river. 
འཛམ-བུ	 A river whose gold is believed to be especially good. | Legendary river carrying the remains of the golden fruit of a legendary jambu (rose apple) tree. | River carrying the remains of the golden fruit of a legendary jambu (rose apple) tree.|A river whose gold is believed to be especially good. 
འཛམ-བུ-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 An alternative name for Jambudvīpa (rose-apple continent), which means “rose-apple banner."|An alternative name for Jambudvīpa (rose-apple continent), which means “rose-apple banner." 
འཛམ-བུའི-གླིང	 The name of the southern continent in Buddhist cosmology, which can mean the known world of humans, or more specifically the Indian subcontinent. A gigantic miraculous rose-apple tree at the source of the great Indian rivers is said to give the continent its name.| The name of the southern continent in Buddhist cosmology, which can mean the known world of humans, or more specifically the Indian subcontinent. A gigantic miraculous rose-apple tree at the source of the great Indian rivers is said to give the continent its name. | The present continent according to Buddhist world descriptions. |The present continent according to Buddhist world descriptions. 
འཛམ-བུ-གླིང	 Southern continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as the “Rose Apple.”| Southern continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as the “Rose Apple.” | The continent (dvīpa) on which we live which, according to ancient South-Asian cosmology, is shaped like a jambū fruit (probably Syzygium cumini, the jambolan, Malabar plum, or Java plum; or possibly S. amarangense, the Java apple, rose-apple, or wax jambu). | The continent to the south of Mt. Sumeru, where according to Buddhist cosmology “the world as we know it” is located. | The name of the southern continent in Buddhist cosmology, which can mean the known world of humans or more specifically the Indian subcontinent. A gigantic, miraculous rose-apple (jambu) tree at the source of the great Indian rivers is said to give the continent its name. | The “Rose-apple continent,” a name for the human world in the ancient Indian cosmology, it can be translated perhaps as “this earth,” or even as “India.” |The “Rose-apple continent,” a name for the human world in the ancient Indian cosmology, it can be translated perhaps as “this earth,” or even as “India.” 
ཛམ-བུ-ལིང	 The name of the southern continent in Buddhist cosmology, which can mean the known world of humans or more specifically the Indian subcontinent. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha, Sri Laṅka is described as being separate from Jambudvīpa. A gigantic miraculous rose-apple tree at the source of the great Indian rivers is said to give the continent its name.|The name of the southern continent in Buddhist cosmology, which can mean the known world of humans or more specifically the Indian subcontinent. In the Kāraṇḍavyūha, Sri Laṅka is described as being separate from Jambudvīpa. A gigantic miraculous rose-apple tree at the source of the great Indian rivers is said to give the continent its name. 
འཛམ-བུའི-ཆུ-བོའི-གསེར-གྱི-འོད	 Mahākātyāyana’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future. Also rendered in Sanskrit in a shorter form as “Jāmbūnadābhāsa,” (Tibetan remains the same). | See “Jāmbūnada­prabhāsa.”| See “Jāmbūnada­prabhāsa.” |Mahākātyāyana’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future. Also rendered in Sanskrit in a shorter form as “Jāmbūnadābhāsa,” (Tibetan remains the same). 
ཛཱ-ན-བ-ཛྲ	 An Indian master, whose precise dates are unknown, and who wrote a commentary on the Entry into Laṅka Sūtra.|An Indian master, whose precise dates are unknown, and who wrote a commentary on the Entry into Laṅka Sūtra. 
བྱིན-པ-འོད-སྲུང	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.| Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. |Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. 
མལ-ལི-ཀ	 sambac jasmine|sambac jasmine 
མཱ-ལི-ཀ	 sambac jasmine|sambac jasmine 
ཛ-ཏཱི	Jasminum grandiflorum.
མ-ལི-ཀ	Jasminum sambac. Erroneously called “Arabian jasmine.”
ཀུན-ད	 Trachelospermum jasminoides. It has its name because of its starlike white blossoms. In India it is used in speech as an example of whiteness, i.e., “as white as star jasmine.” Also called downy jasmine, Chinese jasmine, Chinese ivy, and trader’s compass.|Trachelospermum jasminoides. It has its name because of its starlike white blossoms. In India it is used in speech as an example of whiteness, i.e., “as white as star jasmine.” Also called downy jasmine, Chinese jasmine, Chinese ivy, and trader’s compass. 
སྣ-མ	 Jasminum grandiflorum. Also known as Spanish or Catalonian jasmine, even though it originates from South India. Particularly used as offerings in both Buddhist and Hindu temples.| May also mean a type of jasmine. |Jasminum grandiflorum. Also known as Spanish or Catalonian jasmine, even though it originates from South India. Particularly used as offerings in both Buddhist and Hindu temples. 
ན-པ-མ-ལི-ཀ	 Jasminum arborescens. A species of jasmine that is a shrub and does not twine or climb. Its other common name is navamallika.|Jasminum arborescens. A species of jasmine that is a shrub and does not twine or climb. Its other common name is navamallika. 
ན-བ-མ-ལི-ཀ	 Jasminum arborescens. A species of jasmine that is a shrub and does not twine or climb. Its other common name is navamallika.|Jasminum arborescens. A species of jasmine that is a shrub and does not twine or climb. Its other common name is navamallika. 
ཡོངས-འདུས	 Nyctanthes arbor-tristis. Presently in Hindi called parijat, pārijāta in Kannada, and so on. It features prominently in Indian legends and is one of the earthly trees that are are said to be in paradise. Some dictionaries equate it with the coral tree (māndārava).|Nyctanthes arbor-tristis. Presently in Hindi called parijat, pārijāta in Kannada, and so on. It features prominently in Indian legends and is one of the earthly trees that are are said to be in paradise. Some dictionaries equate it with the coral tree (māndārava). 
ཡོངས-འདུ	 Nyctanthes arbor-tristis. Presently in Hindi called parijat, pārijāta in Kannada, and so on. It features prominently in Indian legends and is one of the earthly trees that are are said to be in paradise. Some dictionaries equate it with the coral tree (māndārava).|Nyctanthes arbor-tristis. Presently in Hindi called parijat, pārijāta in Kannada, and so on. It features prominently in Indian legends and is one of the earthly trees that are are said to be in paradise. Some dictionaries equate it with the coral tree (māndārava). 
སྐྱེས-རབས	 The Buddha’s accounts of his own previous lifetimes. One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine.|The Buddha’s accounts of his own previous lifetimes. One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. 
སྐྱེས-པའི-རབས	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means accounts of the Buddha’s previous lifetimes.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” | Particularly the former lives of Lord Buddha.|As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means accounts of the Buddha’s previous lifetimes.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
མཁྲིས-ནད	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
རྒྱལ-བས-བྱིན	 A bodhisattva of the north.|A bodhisattva of the north. 
རྒྱལ-བྱེད-ཀྱི-ཚལ	 See “Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove.”|See “Anāthapiṇḍada’s grove.” 
ཛེ-ཏའི-ཚལ	 A grove owned by Prince Jeta in Śrāvastī, the capital of the kingdom of Kośala (presently an area within Uttar Pradesh). It was bought by Anāthapiṇḍada and became the monastery that the Buddha spent most rainy seasons in, and is therefore the setting for many sūtras.|A grove owned by Prince Jeta in Śrāvastī, the capital of the kingdom of Kośala (presently an area within Uttar Pradesh). It was bought by Anāthapiṇḍada and became the monastery that the Buddha spent most rainy seasons in, and is therefore the setting for many sūtras. 
རིན-ཆེན-མཐའ-ཡས	Name of the fifty-fifth meditative stability.
རིན-ཆེན-ཟླ-བ-བྱང-ཆུབ-ཀྱི-སྤྱད-པ-སྤྱོད-པ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-དང-ལྡན-པ	The realm of the Buddha Ratnaketu.
རྒྱལ-བ	 An epithet of the Buddha.| One of the synonyms for buddha. Literally, “victor” but only used for founders of religious traditions. | The most common epithet of the buddhas, and also common among the Jains, hence their name. It means “the victorious one.” |An epithet of the Buddha. 
ཛི-ན-མི-ཏྲ	 An Indian paṇḍiṭa resident in Tibet during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. | Indian paṇḍit who translated and edited (among many others) the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations.| Indian paṇḍit who translated and edited (among many others) the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations. |An Indian paṇḍiṭa resident in Tibet during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. 
རྒྱལ-བ-བཤེས-གཉེན	 Indian paṇḍita of the ninth century.|Indian paṇḍita of the ninth century. 
རྒྱལ-བའི-སྲས	 “Son of the Jina,” a synonym for {bodhisattva}.|“Son of the Jina,” a synonym for {bodhisattva}. 
རྒྱལ-བའི-དབང-པོ	 A buddha of the north.|A buddha of the north. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-སྟོབས	 A cakravartin king countless eons in the past.|A cakravartin king countless eons in the past. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-སྟོབས	 A buddha countless eons in the past.|A buddha countless eons in the past. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-འབྱུང-གནས	 The eldest son of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū.|The eldest son of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-སྣང-བ	 A buddha countless eons in the past.|A buddha countless eons in the past. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-དཔའ-བ	 A past buddha who eons previously had been King Mahābala. Also the name of one of the two hundred buddhas Śākyamuni had received the samādhi teaching from in previous lifetimes.|A past buddha who eons previously had been King Mahābala. Also the name of one of the two hundred buddhas Śākyamuni had received the samādhi teaching from in previous lifetimes. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-ལྡན	 A princess countless eons ago.|A princess countless eons ago. 
གཉེན-གྱི-བུ	 See “Jñātiputra, the Nirgrantha.”|See “Jñātiputra, the Nirgrantha.” 
གཉེན-གྱི-བུ-གཅེར-བུ	 One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. According to some, one and the same with Mahāvira, the last Tīrthaṅkara of the Jains.\nJñātiputra the Nirgrantha| One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. According to some, one and the same with Mahāvira, the last Tīrthaṅkara of the Jains.\nJñātiputra the Nirgrantha |One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. According to some, one and the same with Mahāvira, the last Tīrthaṅkara of the Jains.\nJñātiputra the Nirgrantha 
ཚིགས-མཛེས-པ	Sixtieth of the eighty minor marks.
ཚིགས-རིང-བ	Sixty-first of the eighty minor marks.
སྐུའི-ཚིགས-ལེགས-པར-འབྲེལ-པ	Seventieth of the eighty minor marks.
རབ-ཏུ-དགའ-བ	 The first bodhisattva bhūmi.| The first bodhisattva level. |The first bodhisattva bhūmi. 
མཆོག-དགའ	 The second of the four types of joy.|The second of the four types of joy. 
དགའ-བའི-སྤྱན	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
ཆེས-གཞོན-པ	An exemplar is one who has one or another of the twenty-one sets of five qualities given in “The Chapter on Going Forth.”
ཀོ-ཏམ-པའི-རས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. A low-grade cloth made from kotampa fibres or kausheyam silk and linen or cotton weave.
སྐར-མའི-འོད	 A deva in Brahmā’s paradise.|A deva in Brahmā’s paradise. 
ཨ-ཏི-མུཀ-ཏ-ཀ	Phanera variegata. One of the most beautiful and aromatic of Indian trees, also known as orchid tree, mountain ebony, and camel’s foot tree.
ཨ-ཏི-མུག-ཏ-ཀ	Phanera variegata. One of the most beautiful and aromatic of Indian trees, also known as orchid tree, mountain ebony, and camel’s foot tree.
ཀ-ཙ-ལིན-དི	 An epithet for softness, probably in reference, direct or metaphorical, to the down of the kācilindika bird (see Lamotte, Etienne. La Concentration de la Marche Héroïque. Bruxelles: Peeters (1975), p261, n321).|An epithet for softness, probably in reference, direct or metaphorical, to the down of the kācilindika bird (see Lamotte, Etienne. La Concentration de la Marche Héroïque. Bruxelles: Peeters (1975), p261, n321). 
བྱད	 A kind of evil spirit, often associated with vetālas. | Harmful sorcery, or a class of being prone to perpetrating it. (See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-090-002.html#UT22084-090-002-753).\nkākhordas| Harmful sorcery, or a class of being prone to perpetrating it. (See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-090-002.html#UT22084-090-002-753).\nkākhordas |A kind of evil spirit, often associated with vetālas. 
བྱད-སྟེམ	 Harmful sorcery, or a class of being prone to perpetrating it. (See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-090-002.html#UT22084-090-002-753).\nkākhordas|Harmful sorcery, or a class of being prone to perpetrating it. (See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-090-002.html#UT22084-090-002-753).\nkākhordas 
ཀ-ཏྱཱའི-བུ-ནོག-ཅན	 One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. Also rendered here as “Kakuda, a descendant of Kātyāyana.”\nKakuda, a descendant of Kātyāyana| One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. Also rendered here as “Kakuda, a descendant of Kātyāyana.”\nKakuda, a descendant of Kātyāyana |One of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. Also rendered here as “Kakuda, a descendant of Kātyāyana.”\nKakuda, a descendant of Kātyāyana 
ཀཱ-ཏྱའི-བུ-ནོག-ཅན	 One of the six outsider teachers.| One of the six outsider teachers. |One of the six outsider teachers. 
ནག-པོ	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.| A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. | Kāla was the son of Anāthapiṇḍada (Pali: Anāthapindika), the merchant who donated to the Buddha the land for the Jetavana Monastery. | The Kāla Mountains of Bhāratvarṣa (i.e., India) are listed in the Mahābhārata as the mountain ranges Vindhya (separating the Deccan from north India), Mahendra (the eastern Ghats), Malaya (southern half of the Western Ghats), Sahya (the northern half of the Western Ghats), Rakṣavat (northeast extension of the Vindhya), Pāripātra, and the Sūktimat (or Śuktimat), which is presumably another name for the one remaining significant mountain range, the Arbuda in the northwest. | The nāga king who lauded Siddhārtha after he gave up his austerities and prepared to sit under the bodhi tree. | The son of Anāthapiṇḍada (Pali: Anāthapindika), the merchant who donated to the Buddha the land for the Jetavana Monastery. |Kāla was the son of Anāthapiṇḍada (Pali: Anāthapindika), the merchant who donated to the Buddha the land for the Jetavana Monastery. 
ཀ-ལན-ད-ཀའི-གནས	 A place where the Buddha often resided, within the Bamboo Grove (Veṇuvana) outside Rajagṛha that had been donated to him. The name is said to have arisen when, one day, King Bimbisāra fell asleep after a romantic liaison in the Bamboo Grove. While the king rested, his consort wandered off. A snake (the reincarnation of the park’s previous owner, who still resented the king’s acquisition of the park) approached with malign intentions. Through the king’s tremendous merit, a gathering of kalandaka—crows or other birds according to Tibetan renderings, but some Sanskrit and Pali sources suggest flying squirrels—miraculously appeared and began squawking. Their clamor alerted the king’s consort to the danger, who rushed back and hacked the snake to pieces, thereby saving the king’s life. King Bimbisāra then named the spot Kalandakanivāpa (“Kalandakas’ Feeding Place”), sometimes (though not in the Vinayavastu) given as Kalandakanivāsa (“Kalandakas’ Abode”) in their honor. The story is told in the Saṅghabhedavastu (Toh 1, ch.17, Degé Kangyur vol.4, F.77.b et seq.).|A place where the Buddha often resided, within the Bamboo Grove (Veṇuvana) outside Rajagṛha that had been donated to him. The name is said to have arisen when, one day, King Bimbisāra fell asleep after a romantic liaison in the Bamboo Grove. While the king rested, his consort wandered off. A snake (the reincarnation of the park’s previous owner, who still resented the king’s acquisition of the park) approached with malign intentions. Through the king’s tremendous merit, a gathering of kalandaka—crows or other birds according to Tibetan renderings, but some Sanskrit and Pali sources suggest flying squirrels—miraculously appeared and began squawking. Their clamor alerted the king’s consort to the danger, who rushed back and hacked the snake to pieces, thereby saving the king’s life. King Bimbisāra then named the spot Kalandakanivāpa (“Kalandakas’ Feeding Place”), sometimes (though not in the Vinayavastu) given as Kalandakanivāsa (“Kalandakas’ Abode”) in their honor. The story is told in the Saṅghabhedavastu (Toh 1, ch.17, Degé Kangyur vol.4, F.77.b et seq.). 
རི-ནག-པོ	 A mountain.|A mountain. 
ཐིག-ནག-པོ	 The second of the eight hot hells. Black lines are drawn on the bodies of the inhabitants and then they are sawed apart along those lines.|The second of the eight hot hells. Black lines are drawn on the bodies of the inhabitants and then they are sawed apart along those lines. 
དུས-ཅན	 A nāga king who became a pupil of the Buddha. Gandhara scultpures represent his conversion.|A nāga king who became a pupil of the Buddha. Gandhara scultpures represent his conversion. 
སྙིགས-དུས	 The last and worst of the four ages (yuga), the present age of degeneration.|The last and worst of the four ages (yuga), the present age of degeneration. 
འཆར-བ-པོ	 The son of the court priest in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town. Also called Kālodāyin (black Udāyin) because of his dark skin. He and his wife Guptā became monk and nun. He became an arhat who was a skilled teacher. However he also figures prominently in accounts of inappropriate sexual behavior that instigated vinaya rules. He and Guptā are also said to have conceived a son after their ordination.| The son of the court priest in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town. Also called Kālodāyin (black Udāyin) because of his dark skin. He and his wife Guptā became monk and nun. He became an arhat who was a skilled teacher. However he also figures prominently in accounts of inappropriate sexual behavior that instigated vinaya rules. He and Guptā are also said to have conceived a son after their ordination. |The son of the court priest in Kapilavastu, the Buddha’s home town. Also called Kālodāyin (black Udāyin) because of his dark skin. He and his wife Guptā became monk and nun. He became an arhat who was a skilled teacher. However he also figures prominently in accounts of inappropriate sexual behavior that instigated vinaya rules. He and Guptā are also said to have conceived a son after their ordination. 
འཆར-ཀ-ནག-པོ	 The pupil of the Buddha who is said to be foremost in inspiring faith among laypeople.|The pupil of the Buddha who is said to be foremost in inspiring faith among laypeople. 
འཆར-བྱེད-ནག-པོ	 Śrāvaka arhat.|Śrāvaka arhat. 
དགེ-བའི-བཤེས-གཉེན	 A Mahāyāna teacher is termed “friend,” or “benefactor,” which indicates that a bodhisattva-career depends on one’s own effort and that all a teacher can do is inspire, exemplify, and point the way. | A general term to denote a qualified spiritual teacher.| A general term to denote a qualified spiritual teacher. | A spiritual teacher who can contribute to an individual's progress on the spiritual path to enlightenment and act wholeheartedly for the welfare of students. | A title for a teacher of the spiritual path, often translated “spiritual friend." | A title for a teacher of the spiritual path. | The Sanskrit can mean “good friend” or “beneficial friend.” The Tibetan can mean “virtuous friend” or “friend of virtue.” A title for a teacher of the spiritual path. |A Mahāyāna teacher is termed “friend,” or “benefactor,” which indicates that a bodhisattva-career depends on one’s own effort and that all a teacher can do is inspire, exemplify, and point the way. 
འདོད-ལྷ	 God of love; the name of a vetāla.|God of love; the name of a vetāla. 
ཀ-མ-ལ-ཤཱི-ལ	 Indian Buddhist master (713–763) who came to Tibet in the late 8th century. Said to have been assassinated after a debate with the representatives of Chinese Buddhism. A later legend has him return to India and come back in another body in the eleventh century as the master Padampa Sangye.|Indian Buddhist master (713–763) who came to Tibet in the late 8th century. Said to have been assassinated after a debate with the representatives of Chinese Buddhism. A later legend has him return to India and come back in another body in the eleventh century as the master Padampa Sangye. 
པད-མའི-འདབ-མ-དྲི-མ-མེད-པ-སྐར-མའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-མེ-ཏོག-ཀུན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པ	 A buddha in a realm far away in the eastern direction.|A buddha in a realm far away in the eastern direction. 
འདོད-པའི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 Literally, “Lord of Desire.” Name of Kubera/Vaiśravaṇa.|Literally, “Lord of Desire.” Name of Kubera/Vaiśravaṇa. 
འུག-པ	 The name of one of the Buddha’s arhat disciples, a former king, renowned as foremost among those who teach monks. This spelling is attested in the present text but in other texts his name is spelled Mahākapphiṇa, Kapphiṇa, Kapphina, Kaphiṇa, Kasphiṇa, Kaṃphina, Kaphilla, or Kaphiṇḍa.|The name of one of the Buddha’s arhat disciples, a former king, renowned as foremost among those who teach monks. This spelling is attested in the present text but in other texts his name is spelled Mahākapphiṇa, Kapphiṇa, Kapphina, Kaphiṇa, Kasphiṇa, Kaṃphina, Kaphilla, or Kaphiṇḍa. 
གསེར-ཐུབ	 Fifth of the seven buddhas of the past, and second in this kalpa. Also rendered “Kanaka.”| Fifth of the seven buddhas of the past, and second in this kalpa. Also rendered “Kanaka.” | One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. | See “Kanakamuni.” | The fifth of the “seven previous buddhas.” | “Golden Sage.” |See “Kanakamuni.” 
གསེར	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.| A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. | See “Kanakamuni.” |See “Kanakamuni.” 
ཚེར-མ	 One of Upananda’s two novices whose homoerotic play led the Buddha to forbid allowing two novices to live together.|One of Upananda’s two novices whose homoerotic play led the Buddha to forbid allowing two novices to live together. 
ཐོད-པ-ཅན	 A class of wandering ascetics.|A class of wandering ascetics. 
སེར-སྐྱའི-གྲོང	 The Buddha’s home town.|The Buddha’s home town. 
སེར-སྐྱའི-གནས	 See “Kapilavastu.” | The hometown of Śākyamuni Buddha. There are two sites, one on either side of the present border between Nepal and India, that have been identified as its remains. Also known as “Kapilāhvaya.”| The hometown of Śākyamuni Buddha. There are two sites, one on either side of the present border between Nepal and India, that have been identified as its remains. Also known as “Kapilāhvaya.” |See “Kapilavastu.” 
སེར-སྐྱ	 The capital city of the Śākya kingdom, where the Bodhisattva grew up.|The capital city of the Śākya kingdom, where the Bodhisattva grew up. 
སེར-སྐྱེའི-གནས	 The Śākya capital, where Siddhārtha Gautama was raised.|The Śākya capital, where Siddhārtha Gautama was raised. 
ཀ-ཕི-ན	 A principal teacher of the monastic saṅgha during the Buddha’s lifetime. Described as pale skinned and with a prominent nose.|A principal teacher of the monastic saṅgha during the Buddha’s lifetime. Described as pale skinned and with a prominent nose. 
ཀ-པི-ན	 A principal teacher of the monastic saṅgha during the Buddha’s lifetime.|A principal teacher of the monastic saṅgha during the Buddha’s lifetime. 
ཀརྨ-པ	 Successive incarnations as the heads of the Karma Kagyu tradition, beginning with Dusum Khyenpa ({dus gsum mkhyen pa}, 1110–1193).|Successive incarnations as the heads of the Karma Kagyu tradition, beginning with Dusum Khyenpa ({dus gsum mkhyen pa}, 1110–1193). 
མི-དགེ-བ-བཅུའི-ལས-ཀྱི-ལམ	 Killing, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, speaking what is false, divisive speech, harsh speech, scattered speech, covetousness, wish to harm, and wrong view (three of the body, four of speech, and three of the mind).|Killing, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, speaking what is false, divisive speech, harsh speech, scattered speech, covetousness, wish to harm, and wrong view (three of the body, four of speech, and three of the mind). 
དགེ-བ-བཅུའི-ལས-ཀྱི-ལམ	 The opposite of the ten unwholesome courses of karma.|The opposite of the ten unwholesome courses of karma. 
ཤ-ཟ-རྣ-སྒྲོགས	 “Demoness of the Ear,” female spirit who reveals hidden facts or the future by whispering them into one’s ear; very likely another name for Śravaṇa­piśācī.|“Demoness of the Ear,” female spirit who reveals hidden facts or the future by whispering them into one’s ear; very likely another name for Śravaṇa­piśācī. 
ཀར-ནི	 Pterospermum acerifolium. Other names include bayur, muchakunda, muchalinda, and dinner-plate tree.|Pterospermum acerifolium. Other names include bayur, muchakunda, muchalinda, and dinner-plate tree. 
དོང-ཀ	 Pterospermum acerifolium. Other names include bayur, muchakunda, muchalinda, and dinner-plate tree.|Pterospermum acerifolium. Other names include bayur, muchakunda, muchalinda, and dinner-plate tree. 
དཀར-ནི	 Pterospermum acerifolium. Other names include bayur, muchakunda, muchalinda, and dinner-plate tree.|Pterospermum acerifolium. Other names include bayur, muchakunda, muchalinda, and dinner-plate tree. 
ལག-ན-གཞོང-ཐོགས	 One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Sumeru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “those who have basins in their hands.” They are said to be at the very base of Sumeru, and worry that the rising ocean is going to flood them. Because they are continually bailing out water with the basins, they are unable to follow the path to enlightenment.|One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Sumeru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “those who have basins in their hands.” They are said to be at the very base of Sumeru, and worry that the rising ocean is going to flood them. Because they are continually bailing out water with the basins, they are unable to follow the path to enlightenment. 
རས-བལ-ཅན-གྱི-ཚལ	Where Buddha converted a noble band of sixty youths.
ཞོ	 A unit of weight equal to 280 grains troy, or sometimes 176 grains troy. | A unit of weight equal to 280 grains troy, or, sometimes, 176 grains troy. | An ancient Indian weight used for gold or silver, which is around 280 grains troy (about 18 grams).| An ancient Indian weight used for gold or silver, which is around 280 grains troy (about 18 grams). |A unit of weight equal to 280 grains troy, or, sometimes, 176 grains troy. 
གྲི-གུག	A ritual knife meant for flaying skin.
སྟོན-ཟླ-ཐ-ཆུང	 The lunar month in autum which falls in October-November, which in general Indian tradition was considered the most powerful time to perform good actions. | The month of Kārttika.| The month of Kārttika. |The lunar month in autum which falls in October-November, which in general Indian tradition was considered the most powerful time to perform good actions. 
སྟོན-ཟླ-ཐ-ཆུངས	 The lunar month in autum which falls in October-November, which in general Indian tradition was considered the most powerful time to perform good actions.|The lunar month in autum which falls in October-November, which in general Indian tradition was considered the most powerful time to perform good actions. 
སྟོན-ཟླ-ཐ-ཆུངས-སྨིན-དྲུག	 The lunar month in autum which falls in October-November, which in general Indian tradition was considered the most powerful time to perform good actions.|The lunar month in autum which falls in October-November, which in general Indian tradition was considered the most powerful time to perform good actions. 
རྟག-ཏུ-སྙིང-རྗེ-སེམས	 The name of King Mahā­karuṇā­cintin as given in verse.|The name of King Mahā­karuṇā­cintin as given in verse. 
ཀ-ཤི	 The old name for Vārāṇasī.|The old name for Vārāṇasī. 
ཀ-ཤི-ཀ-ནས-བྱུང-བའི-གོས	Cotton from Vārāṇasī, the capital of the ancient kingdom of Kashi, renowned as the best.
ཤིང-ཐགས-ཅན	 Maudgalyāyana’s birthplace.|Maudgalyāyana’s birthplace. 
འོད-སྲུང	 1) Close disciple of the Buddha; 2) Sixth of the seven buddhas of the past, and third in this kalpa. | In Mahāyāna, a buddha who preceded the Buddha Śākyamuni. | One of the Buddha’s principal pupils, who became the Buddha’s successor on his passing. Also the name of the Buddha who preceded Śākyamuni. | One of the Buddha’s principal pupils, who became the Buddha’s successor on his passing. Also the name of the preceding Buddha, the third in this eon, with Śākyamuni as the fourth. Also one of the seven great rishis of ancient India at the origin of Vedic culture. He is portrayed in this sūtra as coming to make offerings to the Buddha along with the other great rishis.| One of the Buddha’s principal pupils, who became the Buddha’s successor on his passing. Also the name of the preceding Buddha, the third in this eon, with Śākyamuni as the fourth. Also one of the seven great rishis of ancient India at the origin of Vedic culture. He is portrayed in this sūtra as coming to make offerings to the Buddha along with the other great rishis. | One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. Also the name of the one of the Buddha’s principal pupils. | Same as Mahākāśyapa. | See “Mahākāśyapa.” | The sixth of the “seven previous buddhas.” |One of the Buddha’s principal pupils, who became the Buddha’s successor on his passing. Also the name of the Buddha who preceded Śākyamuni. 
འདྲོབ-སྐྱོང-གི-བུ-རྫོགས-བྱེད	 Literally, “Pūraṇa, descendant of Kaśyapa,” he was one of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni.| Literally, “Pūraṇa, descendant of Kaśyapa,” he was one of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. |Literally, “Pūraṇa, descendant of Kaśyapa,” he was one of the six tīrthika teachers contemporaneous with Śākyamuni. 
འོད-སྲུང-རྫོགས-བྱེད	 One of the six outsider teachers.| One of the six outsider teachers. |One of the six outsider teachers. 
ལྟེང-རྒྱས-འོད-སྲུང	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.| Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. |Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. 
ཀ-ཏ-ཀ	 Strychnos potatorum; clearing nut.|Strychnos potatorum; clearing nut. 
ཀ-ཏ	 Strychnos potatorum; clearing nut.|Strychnos potatorum; clearing nut. 
ཀ-ཏྱའི-བུ	 (also Mahākātyāyana). Disciple of the Buddha noted for his skill in analysis of the Buddha’s discourses and, traditionally, the founder of the Abhidharma. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-936.| (also Mahākātyāyana). Disciple of the Buddha noted for his skill in analysis of the Buddha’s discourses and, traditionally, the founder of the Abhidharma. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-936. |(also Mahākātyāyana). Disciple of the Buddha noted for his skill in analysis of the Buddha’s discourses and, traditionally, the founder of the Abhidharma. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-936. 
ཀཱ-ཏྱཱའི-བུ	 See “Mahākātyāyana.”| See “Mahākātyāyana.” |See “Mahākātyāyana.” 
ཀཱ-ཏྱཱ-ཡ-ནའི-བུ-ཆེན-པོ	 Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nKātyāyana| Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nKātyāyana |Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nKātyāyana 
ཀཽ-ཎྜི-ནྱ	 See also Ajñātakauṇḍinya.|See also Ajñātakauṇḍinya. 
ཀཽཎཌི-ཉ	 One of the five excellent companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. Kauṇḍinya immediately realized its import and entered the stream, shortly thereafter becoming an arhat. | The court priest in the Buddha’s father’s kingdom, who predicted the Buddha’s enlightenment. He became one of the Buddha’s five companions in asceticism. They renounced him when he abandoned asceticism but after his enlightenment they became his pupils. Kauṇḍinya was the first to convert to being his pupil and was the first of his pupils to become an arhat. Also called “Kauṇḍinyagotra” and “Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya.”| The court priest in the Buddha’s father’s kingdom, who predicted the Buddha’s enlightenment. He became one of the Buddha’s five companions in asceticism. They renounced him when he abandoned asceticism but after his enlightenment they became his pupils. Kauṇḍinya was the first to convert to being his pupil and was the first of his pupils to become an arhat. Also called “Kauṇḍinyagotra” and “Ājñāta­kauṇḍinya.” |One of the five excellent companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. Kauṇḍinya immediately realized its import and entered the stream, shortly thereafter becoming an arhat. 
ཀཽཎ-ཌི-ཉ	 One of the five former spiritual friends with whom Gautama had practiced meditation before his awakening.| One of the five former spiritual friends with whom Gautama had practiced meditation before his awakening. | The court priest in the Buddha’s father’s kingdom, he predicted the Buddha’s enlightenment, and was the first of the Buddha’s pupils to become an arhat. |The court priest in the Buddha’s father’s kingdom, he predicted the Buddha’s enlightenment, and was the first of the Buddha’s pupils to become an arhat. 
ཀཽཎྜིནྱ	 One of the first five disciples of the Buddha.|One of the first five disciples of the Buddha. 
ཀཽཎཌི-ཉ-རིགས	 Alternate name for “Kauṇḍinya.” Literally “of the Kauṇḍinya family.”|Alternate name for “Kauṇḍinya.” Literally “of the Kauṇḍinya family.” 
ཀོའུ-ར-པ	 The hundred sons of King Dhṛtarāśtra, who were the enemies of their cousins, the Pāṇḍava brothers. Their family name means they are the descendants of the ancient King Kur (as were the Pāṇḍava brothers). Their battle is the central theme of the Mahābhārata, India’s greatest epic.|The hundred sons of King Dhṛtarāśtra, who were the enemies of their cousins, the Pāṇḍava brothers. Their family name means they are the descendants of the ancient King Kur (as were the Pāṇḍava brothers). Their battle is the central theme of the Mahābhārata, India’s greatest epic. 
ཀཽ-ཤཱམ-བཱི	 Home to a group of troublesome monks who quarreled with monks from Vaiśālī.|Home to a group of troublesome monks who quarreled with monks from Vaiśālī. 
ཀཽ-ཤི-ཀ	 A rishi, usually said to be identical with Viśvamati, but his son and descendants also carried this name. | Another name for Indra. Kauśika, Śakra, and Indra all refer to the same god, centrally prominent in the Vedas, who in Buddhist cosmogony is regarded as the king of gods in the realm of desire. | Epithet of Śakra.| Epithet of Śakra. |Another name for Indra. Kauśika, Śakra, and Indra all refer to the same god, centrally prominent in the Vedas, who in Buddhist cosmogony is regarded as the king of gods in the realm of desire. 
གསུས-ཆེན	 Foremost among the Buddha’s pupils in analytic reasoning.|Foremost among the Buddha’s pupils in analytic reasoning. 
ཀ-བ-དཔལ-བརྩེགས	 Tibetan translator (fl. late eighth–early ninth centuries).|Tibetan translator (fl. late eighth–early ninth centuries). 
དམ-བཞག-པ	The terms {phyag rgya pa} and {dam bzhag pa} are synonyms refering to one of several official administrative or managerial positions at a monastery.
ཕྱག-རྒྱ-པ	The terms {phyag rgya pa} and {dam bzhag pa} are synonyms refering to one of several official administrative or managerial positions at a monastery.
སྐྲ-ཅན-མ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra; also of Arapacana.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra; also of Arapacana. 
སྐྲ-ཅན	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
དུ-བ	 A comet or a falling star personified.|A comet or a falling star personified. 
ཁ-ལ-ཏི-ཀ	 Name of a mountain in present day Bihar, possibly at Barabar. The mention of it in this sūtra, as its setting, is the only mention at all in the Kangyur.|Name of a mountain in present day Bihar, possibly at Barabar. The mention of it in this sūtra, as its setting, is the only mention at all in the Kangyur. 
ཕྲག-རྩུབ	 A king of the asuras, present at the teaching of the sūtra.|A king of the asuras, present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
ཁ-ཤ	 A tribe of people from the northwest of India and central Asia who were significant in ancient India and are described in the Mahābhārata as having taken part in the Kurukṣetra war on the side of the Kurus against the Paṇḍavas. The Purāṇic literature generally describes them in a negative light, as barbarians. They are often mentioned in Buddhist literature and presently maintain Khasa culture in Himachal Pradesh.|A tribe of people from the northwest of India and central Asia who were significant in ancient India and are described in the Mahābhārata as having taken part in the Kurukṣetra war on the side of the Kurus against the Paṇḍavas. The Purāṇic literature generally describes them in a negative light, as barbarians. They are often mentioned in Buddhist literature and presently maintain Khasa culture in Himachal Pradesh. 
ཨུ-ཤི-ར	Vetiveris zizanioides.
ཁ-ཊྭཱཾ-ག	 A staff with a single or three pointed tip and a freshly decapitated head, a rotting head and a skull skewered on its shaft.|A staff with a single or three pointed tip and a freshly decapitated head, a rotting head and a skull skewered on its shaft. 
མཁས-གྲུབ-རྗེ	One of the principal pupils of Tsongkhapa, the founder of the Gelug tradition. Also retrospectively know as the first Panchen Lama (b. 1385−d. 1438).
སྲན-མ	 Phaseolus mungo, Vigna mungo.|Phaseolus mungo, Vigna mungo. 
གསད-པ	One of the four main types of enlightened activity.
སྲོག-གཅོད-པ	 First of the ten non-virtuous actions.\nslaying of living creatures|First of the ten non-virtuous actions.\nslaying of living creatures 
མི-འམ-ཅི	 A class of semidivine beings known for their musical skills, depicted as half-horse and half-human, or half-bird and half-human.| A class of semidivine beings known for their musical skills, depicted as half-horse and half-human, or half-bird and half-human. | A class of semidivine beings that resemble humans to the degree that their very name—which means “Is that a man?”—suggests some confusion as to their divine status. |A class of semidivine beings that resemble humans to the degree that their very name—which means “Is that a man?”—suggests some confusion as to their divine status. 
མིའམ-ཅི	 A mythical being with a horse’s head and human body. | A mythical hybrid being with the body of a man and the head of a horse or vice versa. | A race of celestial musicians who are half human and half horse.| A race of celestial musicians who are half human and half horse. | A race of celestial musicians who are half humanoid and half horse. | A semi-divine being who is partly human and musically skilled. | Meaning “Is it a man?” These are a class of beings included in the god realms. They are half-bird/half-human in appearance; hence their name. | Mythical being with a horse’s head and a human body (or vice versa); literally “man or what?” Along with the gandharvas, kiṃnaras are celebrated as celestial musicians. |A mythical being with a horse’s head and human body. 
མི-འམ-ཅི-མོ	 A female kiṃnara.|A female kiṃnara. 
ཀིམ-པ-ལ	 A musical instrument, of an unidentified kind though sometimes translated “cymbals.”|A musical instrument, of an unidentified kind though sometimes translated “cymbals.” 
སྐྱེས-བུ-འམ-ཅི	 A race of beings said to live in the Himalayas who have bodies of lions and human heads.|A race of beings said to live in the Himalayas who have bodies of lions and human heads. 
སྐྱེས-བུ-འམ	 A race of beings said to live in the Himalayas who have bodies of lions and human heads.|A race of beings said to live in the Himalayas who have bodies of lions and human heads. 
འོད-ཟེར-རབ-ཏུ-འགྱེད-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
སྒྲ-དབྱངས-མངོན-པར-སྒྲོགས-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	A bodhisattva.
གྲགས-པའི-སྒྲ-དབྱངས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	A buddha.
སྒྲ-དབྱངས-རྣམ-པར-དག-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	A bodhisattva.
འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར-དབང-པོའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
ཨུཏ-པ-ལ-རྒྱས-པ-བསུང-གི-རྒྱལ-པོ	A buddha.
པུས-མོའི-ལྷ-ང-དག-མཛེས-པར-གྱུར-པ	Third of the eighty minor marks.
རིག-མ	 An epithet of the female deity of the maṇḍala (most frequently as the consort of the main deity) who represents knowledge; the tantric consort; knowledge; frequently used in the sense of magical incantations and magical power. Also rendered here as “knowledge.” | An epithet of the female deity of the maṇḍala (most frequently as the consort of the main deity) who represents knowledge; the tantric consort; knowledge; frequently used in the sense of magical incantations and magical power. Also rendered here as “vidyā.”|An epithet of the female deity of the maṇḍala (most frequently as the consort of the main deity) who represents knowledge; the tantric consort; knowledge; frequently used in the sense of magical incantations and magical power. Also rendered here as “vidyā.” 
རྗེས-སུ-རྟོགས-པའི-ཤེས-པ	 Second of the eleven aspects of knowledge.|Second of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཀུན-རྫོབ-ཤེས-པ	 Fourth of the eleven aspects of knowledge.| Fourth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. |Fourth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཆོས-ཤེས-པ	 First of the eleven aspects of knowledge.| First of the eleven aspects of knowledge. |First of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཇི-ལྟ-བ-བཞིན-ཤེས-པ	 Eleventh of the eleven aspects of knowledge.|Eleventh of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
སྡུག-བསྔལ-ཤེས-པ	 Fifth of the eleven aspects of knowledge.| Fifth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. |Fifth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཕ-རོལ-གྱི-སེམས-ཤེས-པ	 Third of the eleven aspects of knowledge.|Third of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ལམ-ཤེས-པ	 Eighth of the eleven aspects of knowledge.|Eighth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
བརྟན-མཁས-ཀྱི-ཡོན-ཏན	 To oversee wards and apprentices, a monk must himself be both stable, meaning he has been ordained at least five or ten years without incurring a fault, and knowledgeable, meaning he has at least one of the twenty-one sets of five qualities described in “The Chapter on Going Forth.”|To oversee wards and apprentices, a monk must himself be both stable, meaning he has been ordained at least five or ten years without incurring a fault, and knowledgeable, meaning he has at least one of the twenty-one sets of five qualities described in “The Chapter on Going Forth.” 
ཕྲ-བ-ལ-འཇུག-པའི-མཁྱེན-པ	 The various aspects of the knowledge that engages in subtlety of conduct, etc. include the knowledge that engages with subtle transmigration at the time of death, the knowledge that engages with subtle processes of rebirth, and the knowledge that engages with subtle buddha activities—emanation, renunciation, manifestly perfect enlightenment, turning the wheel of the sacred doctrine, consecrating the life span, passing into final nirvāṇa, and so forth.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-130.)|The various aspects of the knowledge that engages in subtlety of conduct, etc. include the knowledge that engages with subtle transmigration at the time of death, the knowledge that engages with subtle processes of rebirth, and the knowledge that engages with subtle buddha activities—emanation, renunciation, manifestly perfect enlightenment, turning the wheel of the sacred doctrine, consecrating the life span, passing into final nirvāṇa, and so forth.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-130.) 
འོད-ཀྱིས-རྣམ-པར-རྩེ-བ-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 A bodhisattva.| A bodhisattva. |A bodhisattva. 
ཀུན-འབྱུང-བ-ཤེས-པ	 Sixth of the eleven aspects of knowledge.| Sixth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. |Sixth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
མི-སྐྱེ-བ-ཤེས-པ	 Tenth of the eleven aspects of knowledge.|Tenth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཟད-པར-ཤེས-པ	 Ninth of the eleven aspects of knowledge.|Ninth of the eleven aspects of knowledge. 
ཆོམ-རྐུན-པར-གྲགས-པ	One of the classes of people barred from joining the renunciate order.
ཀོ-ཀི-ལ	 An asura in one of the variants of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.|An asura in one of the variants of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. 
པང-ནས-སྐྱེས	 The name given to Maudgalyāyana by his relatives because it seemed to them he had come to them from the lap of the gods.|The name given to Maudgalyāyana by his relatives because it seemed to them he had come to them from the lap of the gods. 
ཀོ-ས-ལ	 An ancient kingdom in Northern India.|An ancient kingdom in Northern India. 
སྟོད-རིངས	 Maternal uncle of Śāriputra and son of Māṭhara. He went south to study Lokāyata philosophy with Tiṣya. He later returned to study Lokāyata philosophy with an order of wandering ascetics, pledged not to cut his nails so long as he upheld Lokāyata philosophy and became known as Dīrghanakha, “He Who Has Long Fingernails.”|Maternal uncle of Śāriputra and son of Māṭhara. He went south to study Lokāyata philosophy with Tiṣya. He later returned to study Lokāyata philosophy with an order of wandering ascetics, pledged not to cut his nails so long as he upheld Lokāyata philosophy and became known as Dīrghanakha, “He Who Has Long Fingernails.” 
འཁོར-བ-འཇིག	 One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. | The first Buddha of the “Good Eon” (bhadrakalpa) of one thousand buddhas, our own Śākyamuni having been the fourth, and Maitreya expected to come as the fifth. Also spelled Krakutsanda, Kukutsunda, Kukucchanda. | The first buddha of our eon; the fifth buddha of the “seven generations of buddhas” ({sangs rgyas rab bdun}). Also found as Kakutsanda, Kakutsunda, etc. See Edgerton (1985), s.v. Krakucchanda, for the various spellings.| The first buddha of our eon; the fifth buddha of the “seven generations of buddhas” ({sangs rgyas rab bdun}). Also found as Kakutsanda, Kakutsunda, etc. See Edgerton (1985), s.v. Krakucchanda, for the various spellings. |One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. 
ལོག-པར-དད-སེལ	 Fourth of the seven buddhas of the past, and first in this kalpa.| Fourth of the seven buddhas of the past, and first in this kalpa. | The first Buddha of the “Good Eon” (bhadrakalpa) of one thousand buddhas, our own Śākyamuni having been the fourth, and Maitreya expected to come as the fifth. Also spelled Krakutsanda, Kukutsunda, Kukucchanda. | The fourth of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh. Also the first of the buddhas in this eon, with Śākyamuni as the fourth. The Tibetan translation in the Kāraṇḍavyūha is “elimination of incorrect faith,” and this is found in the Mahāvyutpatti, whereas the later standard Tibetan translation is {'khor ba 'jig} or “destruction of saṃsara.” It is a Sanskritization of the middle-Indic name Kakusaṃdha. Kaku may mean summit and saṃdha is the inner or hidden meaning. | The fourth of the “seven previous buddhas.” |The first Buddha of the “Good Eon” (bhadrakalpa) of one thousand buddhas, our own Śākyamuni having been the fourth, and Maitreya expected to come as the fifth. Also spelled Krakutsanda, Kukutsunda, Kukucchanda. 
ལོག-པར-དང-སལ	 “Destroyer of Saṃsāra.”| “Destroyer of Saṃsāra.” |“Destroyer of Saṃsāra.” 
ཁོར-བ-འཇིག	 The first buddha of our eon; the fifth buddha of the “seven generations of buddhas” ({sangs rgyas rab bdun}); there are variants of the Sanskrit (Kakutsunda, Kukucchanda) and the Tibetan {log pa da sel} seems to refer to the same buddha.|The first buddha of our eon; the fifth buddha of the “seven generations of buddhas” ({sangs rgyas rab bdun}); there are variants of the Sanskrit (Kakutsunda, Kukucchanda) and the Tibetan {log pa da sel} seems to refer to the same buddha. 
ལོག-དད-སེལ	 Fourth of the seven buddhas of the past, and first in this kalpa.|Fourth of the seven buddhas of the past, and first in this kalpa. 
བྱ-རྒྱུད	 The first class of tantra in most systems of tantra classification (the other classes being, in the fivefold classification, Caryātantra, Yogatantra, Yogottaratantra, and Yoganiruttaratantra).|The first class of tantra in most systems of tantra classification (the other classes being, in the fivefold classification, Caryātantra, Yogatantra, Yogottaratantra, and Yoganiruttaratantra). 
རྒྱང-གྲགས	 A distance equivalent to five hundred arm spans. | A measure of distance corresponding to one calling-distance. Four krośa equal one yojana. | A measure of distance, one quarter of a yojana; supposedly the distance within which a cry can be heard.| A measure of distance, one quarter of a yojana; supposedly the distance within which a cry can be heard. | A quarter of a yojana, sometimes called an “Indian league.” It is said to be about two miles. The Tibetan means “an earshot.” |A quarter of a yojana, a distance that could be between one and over two miles. The milestones or kos-stones along the Indian trunk road were just over two miles apart. The Tibetan means “earshot.” 
གཽ-ཏམ-ནག-པོ	 A nāga king.|A nāga king. 
ནག-པོ-རྡོ-རྗེ	 An 11th or 12th century Buddhist commentator. Wrote Recollection: a commentary on the Mahāmāyā Tantra.|An 11th or 12th century Buddhist commentator. Wrote Recollection: a commentary on the Mahāmāyā Tantra. 
གཤེད-བྱེད	 A kind of female evil spirit or sorceress.| A kind of female evil spirit or sorceress. | A spirit one can request, by making offerings, to destroy others. Usually female, with this sūtra having the sole instance of a male entity. There are also references to humans who have this power. |A spirit one can request, by making offerings, to destroy others. Usually female, with this sūtra having the sole instance of a male entity. There are also references to humans who have this power. 
རྒྱལ-རིགས	 A member of the ruling caste of classical Indian society. | One of the four classes of the Indian caste system. Traditionally rulers and administrators belonged to this caste.| Second of the four classes of traditional Indian society. | The royal, noble, or warrior caste in the four-caste system of India. | The warrior, or royal, caste in the four-caste system of India. | The warrior, ruling, or royal class in the four-caste system of India. | Warrior caste. |One of the four classes of the Indian caste system. Traditionally rulers and administrators belonged to this caste. 
བདེ-བས-བྱིན	 A bodhisattva in the distant past.|A bodhisattva in the distant past. 
སའི-སྙིང-པོ	 A bodhisattva. | An important bodhisattva disciple of the Buddha.| An important bodhisattva disciple of the Buddha. |A bodhisattva. 
ཀུ-བེ-ར	 An alternate name for the yakṣa Jambhala. | The son of Vaiśravaṇa (one of the four great kings).| The son of Vaiśravaṇa (one of the four great kings). |An alternate name for the yakṣa Jambhala. 
ལུས-ངན	 Epithet of Vaiśravaṇa.| Epithet of Vaiśravaṇa. | The god of wealth. |The god of wealth. 
ལུས-ངན-པོ	 Epithet of Vaiśravaṇa.|Epithet of Vaiśravaṇa. 
ཀུ-ཀུ-རི-པ	 Counted among the most famous of the Indian Buddhist Mahāsiddhas and renowned for his association with packs of dogs (kukkura), he is a central figure in a number of tantric lineages, specifically of the Guhya­samāja Tantra and Mahā­māyā Tantra. He was active sometime between the 8th and 10th centuries.|Counted among the most famous of the Indian Buddhist Mahāsiddhas and renowned for his association with packs of dogs (kukkura), he is a central figure in a number of tantric lineages, specifically of the Guhya­samāja Tantra and Mahā­māyā Tantra. He was active sometime between the 8th and 10th centuries. 
འཚོ-བྱེད-གཞོན-ནུ	Jīvaka is a title meaning “physician.” Kumārabhṛta means “raised by the prince,” in this case Prince Abhaya, who was said to have fostered the future physician. He was personal physician to King Bimbisāra and the Buddha. He asked that invalids would not be accepted into the order, for it would prove too great a burden on the king’s treasury, which paid for all the treatment he administered, and his own health.\nphysician Kumārabhṛta
ཀུམ-བྷ-ཀ	 Inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath).|Inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath). 
བུམ-པ-ཅན	 Inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath).|Inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath). 
གྲུལ-བུམ	 A class of dwarf beings subordinate to the Guardian King of the South. The name uses a play on the word āṇḍa, which means egg but is a euphemism for testicle. Thus, they are often depicted as having testicles as big as pots (from khumba, or “pot”). | A class of nonhuman beings. | A class of yakṣa that lives in water but have the heads of various types of insects or animals. | A disease-causing demon, with an etymology of “little warm egg,” also used for benevolent deities. However, the Tibetan term used in the Kāraṇḍavyūha is more commonly used (as in the Mahavyutpatti concordance) to translate kumbhanda, a humanoid being with an animal’s head that dwells in the sea.| A disease-causing demon, with an etymology of “little warm egg,” also used for benevolent deities. However, the Tibetan term used in the Kāraṇḍavyūha is more commonly used (as in the Mahavyutpatti concordance) to translate kumbhanda, a humanoid being with an animal’s head that dwells in the sea. | Dwarf spirits said to have either large stomachs or huge, amphora-sized testicles. | Dwarf spirits said to have either large stomachs or huge, pot-sized testicles. | Vampire demon; a type of yakṣa. |A class of dwarf beings subordinate to the Guardian King of the South. The name uses a play on the word āṇḍa, which means egg but is a euphemism for testicle. Thus, they are often depicted as having testicles as big as pots (from khumba, or “pot”). 
ཡི-དགས-གྲུལ-བུམ	 A class of beings said to dwell in the east under the jurisdiction of the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra.| A class of beings said to dwell in the east under the jurisdiction of the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra. |A class of beings said to dwell in the east under the jurisdiction of the great king Dhṛtarāṣṭra. 
ཀུ-ན-ལ	Himalayan bird with beautiful bright eyes.
མདུང-ཅན	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
ཀུ-རུ-ཀུ-ལླཱ	 The Buddhist goddess of enthrallment related to or emanating from Tārā.|The Buddhist goddess of enthrallment related to or emanating from Tārā. 
ཀུ-ཤི-ན	 The capital of the Malla kingdom, and the town, in the vicinity of which the Buddha passed into parinirvāṇa.|The capital of the Malla kingdom, and the town, in the vicinity of which the Buddha passed into parinirvāṇa. 
ཕ-ཐ-སེ	 Benincasa hispida.|Benincasa hispida. 
སོ-བརྩེགས	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
སྤྱིལ-བུ-ཅན	 A settlement / village in the country of Vṛji. According to a commentary on the Mahāvaṃsa, the Vaṃsatthappakāsinī, it is one gāvuta (about two miles) away from the river Ganges.|A settlement / village in the country of Vṛji. According to a commentary on the Mahāvaṃsa, the Vaṃsatthappakāsinī, it is one gāvuta (about two miles) away from the river Ganges. 
དམངས-རིགས	 The caste of the laborers and servants of classical Indian society. | The fourth and lowest of the classes in the caste system of India. Generally includes the laboring class. | The name of the lowest of the four castes. “Untouchables.”| The name of the lowest of the four castes. “Untouchables.” |Fourth of the four classes of traditional Indian society. 
དཔལ-མོ	 The Hindu goddess of prosperity.|The Hindu goddess of prosperity. 
བརྐྱང-མ	 The prāṇa channel on the left side of the body.|The prāṇa channel on the left side of the body. 
འཕྱང-མ	 A rākṣasī known as such only in this sūtra. She is, however, listed in the tantra The Great Peahen Incantation along with Hārītī as one of ten piśācīs who protected the Buddha while he was in the womb.|A rākṣasī known as such only in this sūtra. She is, however, listed in the tantra The Great Peahen Incantation along with Hārītī as one of ten piśācīs who protected the Buddha while he was in the womb. 
བེའུ-ཕྲུག	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཐེང-པོ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
གློག-གི-སྒྲོན-མ	 Name of the fortieth meditative stability.|Name of the fortieth meditative stability. 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-སྒྲོན-མ	 Name of the thirrty-fourth meditative stability.|Name of the thirrty-fourth meditative stability. 
ཉི-མའི-སྒྲོན-མ	 Name of the forty-sixth meditative stability.| Name of the forty-sixth meditative stability. |Name of the forty-sixth meditative stability. 
འོད-ཟེར-རྒྱལ-པོའི-སྒྲོན-མ	 A bodhisattva.| A bodhisattva. |A bodhisattva. 
བྲི-ཧ-ཏི	Solanum indicum.
རས-ཡུག-ཆེན	“Large” meaning twelve cubits. An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
འབྲས	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
རིམས	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.\nlatent
དགེ-བསྙེན	 A male who has taken the layperson’s vows. | An unordained male practitioner who observes the five vows not to kill, lie, steal, be intoxicated, or commit sexual misconduct.\nlaymen | Householders with definite vows that set them off from the ordinary householder.\nlaymen | Layman.| Layman. | Male lay devotees who have taken the five precepts.\nlaymen | The Tibetan and Sanskrit forms are gendered, and thus here specifically a male lay devotee, but there are also female lay devotees with the corresponding gendered forms. | male lay practitioner |The Tibetan and Sanskrit forms are gendered, and thus here specifically a male lay devotee, but there are also female lay devotees with the corresponding gendered forms. 
དགེ-བསྙེན-མ	 A female who has taken the layperson’s vows. | An unordained female practitioner who observes the five vows not to kill, lie, steal, be intoxicated, or commit sexual misconduct.\nlaywomen | Householders with definite vows that set them off from the ordinary householder.\nlaywomen | Laywoman.| Laywoman. | female lay practitioner |Female lay devotees who have taken the five precepts.\nlaywomen 
ཅི-ཏྲ-ཀ	Plumbago zeylanica.
ཅི-ཏྲ-དམར-པོ	 Plumbago rosea.|Plumbago rosea. 
ཤ-བཀྲ	An illness considered an impediment to ordination. Can translate both sitapuṣpika and kilāsa.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
བྱ-བ-བྱས-པའི-ས	Name of the seventh level of realization attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.
འདོད-ཆགས-དང-བྲལ-བའི-ས	Name of the sixth level attainable by bodhisattvas, from which point there is no more rebirth. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.
བྱང-ཆུབ-སེམས-དཔའི-ས	Name of the ninth level of realization attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.
རང-སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ས	Name of the eighth level attainable by bodhisattvas. See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282.
ལྷ-ས	A xylograph Kangyur printed in 1934. Based mainly on the Narthang ({snar thang}) Kangyur but with some texts following the Degé Kangyur, it is among several Kangyurs of “mixed” lineage, including elements from the Thempangma ({them spangs ma}) in addition to the predominating Tshalpa ({tshal pa}) traditions.
ཞོལ	A xylograph Kangyur printed in 1934. Based mainly on the Narthang ({snar thang}) Kangyur but with some texts following the Degé Kangyur, it is among several Kangyurs of “mixed” lineage, including elements from the Thempangma ({them spangs ma}) in addition to the predominating Tshalpa ({tshal pa}) traditions.
ནམ-མཁའ-ལྟར-ཆགས-པ-མེད-ལ-རྣམ-པར-གྲོལ-ཞིང-གོས-པ-མེད-པ	 Name of the 111th meditative stability.| Name of the 111th meditative stability. |Name of the 111th meditative stability. 
རྣམ-ཐར-སྒོ-གསུམ	 Emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness.|Emptiness, signlessness, and wishlessness. 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པའི-སྒོ-གསུམ	 Absence of marks, absence of wishes, and emptiness.|Absence of marks, absence of wishes, and emptiness. 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པ-གསུམ	 Absence of marks, absence of wishes, and emptiness.|Absence of marks, absence of wishes, and emptiness. 
རྣམ-པར-ཐར-བ	 This can include any method for liberation. The most common list is of eight liberations: (1) form viewing form, the view of dependent origination and emptiness; (2) the formless viewing form, having seen internal emptiness, seeing the emptiness of external forms; (3) the view of the pleasant, seeing pleasant appearances as empty and contemplating the unpleasant; (4) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of infinite space; (5) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of infinite consciousness; (6) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of nothingness; (7) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of neither perception nor nonperception; (8) seeing the emptiness of the state of cessation.|This can include any method for liberation. The most commonly listed are the eight liberations: (1) form viewing form: the view of dependent origination and emptiness; (2) the formless viewing form: having seen internal emptiness, seeing the emptiness of external forms; (3) the view of the pleasant: seeing pleasant appearances as empty and contemplating the unpleasant; (4) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of infinite space; (5) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of infinite consciousness; (6) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of nothingness; (7) seeing the emptiness of the formless meditation of neither perception nor nonperception; and (8) seeing the emptiness of the state of cessation. 
ཐབས	 Also refers to the male partner in sexual yoga. | The concept of skillful means is central to the understanding of the Buddha’s enlightened deeds and the many scriptures which are revealed contingent to the needs, interests, and mental dispositions of specific types of individuals. According to the Great Vehicle, training in skillful means collectively denotes the first five of the six transcendent perfections when integrated with wisdom, the sixth transcendent perfection, to form a union of discriminative awareness and means.| The skillful acts of a bodhisattva for the benefit of others. |This is the expression in action of the great compassion of the Buddha and the bodhisattvas—physical, verbal, and mental. It follows that one empathetically aware of the troubles of living beings would, for his very survival, devise the most potent and efficacious techniques possible to remove those troubles, and the troubles of living beings are removed effectively only when they reach liberation. “Art” was chosen over the usual “method” and “means” because it has a stronger connotation of efficacy in our technological world; also, in Buddhism, liberative art is identified with the extreme of power, energy, and efficacy, as symbolized in the vajra (adamantine scepter): The importance of this term is highlighted in this sūtra by the fact that Vimalakīrti himself is introduced in the chapter entitled “Inconceivable Skill in Liberative Art”; this indicates that he, as a function of the nirmāṇakāya (incarnation-body), just like the Buddha himself, is the very incarnation of liberative art, and every act of his life is therefore a technique for the development and liberation of living beings. The “liberative” part of the translation follows “salvifique” in Lamotte’s phrase “moyens salvifique.” 
ཇིགས-སྒྲོལ	Name of Maitreya in a previous lifetime as a bodhisattva.
ལིད-ཙ-བཱི	 Name of the tribe and republican city-state whose capital was Vaiśālī, where Vimalakīrti lived, and the main events of this sūtra take place.|Name of the tribe and republican city-state whose capital was Vaiśālī, where Vimalakīrti lived, and the main events of this sūtra take place. 
ཚེ	 lifespan|lifespan 
སྲོག-གི-དབང-པོ	 One of the nonmental motivations, defined as the force of life-duration, being a concept of the Abhidharma. See T. Stcherbatski, Central Conception of Buddhism (London, 1923), p. 105.| One of the nonmental motivations, defined as the force of life-duration, being a concept of the Abhidharma. See T. Stcherbatski, Central Conception of Buddhism (London, 1923), p. 105. |One of the nonmental motivations, defined as the force of life-duration, being a concept of the Abhidharma. See T. Stcherbatski, Central Conception of Buddhism (London, 1923), p. 105. 
དགག-དབྱེ	A ceremony in which restrictions adopted for the rains retreat are relaxed, marking its end. Also short for the Vinayavastu’s third chapter on the same.
འདྲི-མེད-འོད	 A monk, main character of the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations.| A monk, main character of the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations. |A monk, main character of the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations. 
འོད-བཟང-པོའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of a tathāgata.| Realm of a tathāgata. |Realm of a tathāgata. 
ཟླ-བ-ཉ-བའི-འོད-དྲི-མ-མེད-པ	 Name of the 101st meditative stability.| Name of the 101st meditative stability. |Name of the 101st meditative stability. 
ཉི-མའི-སྙིང-པོ-འོད-ཟེར-དྲི-མ-མེད-པ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
མེ-ཏོག-པདྨ-ལྟ-བུ	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
ཉི-ཚེ-བའི-སེམས-ཅན	finite number of sentient beings
ཟར-མའི-རས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཕྱག-གི-རི-མོ-མཐོ-བ-དག	Thirty-third of the eighty minor marks.
ལིང-ག	 Liṅga and vajra have many other meanings (too many to list here).| Liṅga and vajra have many other meanings (too many to list here). |Liṅga and vajra have many other meanings (too many to list here). 
རྡོ-རྗེ	 A ritual sceptre; thunderbot; a diamond; a general term denoting an indestructible non-dual state. | Liṅga and vajra have many other meanings (too many to list here). | The term stands for indestructibility and perfect stability. According to Indian mythology, the vajra is the all-powerful god Indra’s weapon, likened to a thunderbolt, which made him invincible. It also relates to the diamond which is the hardest physical material. | The word vajra refers to the “thunderbolt,” the indestructible and irresistible weapon that first appears in Indian literature in the hand of the Vedic deity Indra. As a symbol of indestructibility and great power it is used in the Kāraṇḍavyūha to describe the qualities of the maṇi mantra.| The word vajra refers to the “thunderbolt,” the indestructible and irresistible weapon that first appears in Indian literature in the hand of the Vedic deity Indra. As a symbol of indestructibility and great power it is used in the Kāraṇḍavyūha to describe the qualities of the maṇi mantra. |Liṅga and vajra have many other meanings (too many to list here). 
རྟགས	 The phallus as the symbol of Śiva.\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html#UT22084-051-004-590.|The phallus as the symbol of Śiva.\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html#UT22084-051-004-590. 
འགྲམ-པ-སེང-གེའི-དང-འདྲ-བ	Twentieth of the thirty-two major marks.
སེང-གེ-རྣམ-པར-རྩེ-བ	Name of the 3rd meditative stability.
སྒྲོས-བིམ-པ-ལྟར-དམར-བ	Twenty-third of the eighty minor marks.
ཉིད-ཀྱང-མི-གནས-པར-འདུག-པ	Literally, “to live where I do not,” where “I” refers to the Buddha.
སངས-རྒྱས-སྤྱན	 Goddess invoked in divination and soothsaying.|Goddess invoked in divination and soothsaying. 
སྤྱན-མ	 A female deity in one of the variants of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa; also the name of the consort of Ratna­sambhava.|A female deity in one of the variants of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa; also the name of the consort of Ratna­sambhava. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-མགོན-པོ	 “Lord of the World,” an epithet of Avalokiteśvara.|“Lord of the World,” an epithet of Avalokiteśvara. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-སྐྱོང	 Lit. “World-Protectors.” They are the same as the four Mahārājas, the great kings of the quarters ({rgyal chen bzhi}), namely, Vaiśravaṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, and Virūpākṣa, whose mission is to report on the activities of mankind to the gods of the Trāyastriṃśa heaven and who have pledged to protect the practitioners of the Dharma. Each universe has its own set of four.|Lit. “World-Protectors.” They are the same as the four Mahārājas, the great kings of the quarters ({rgyal chen bzhi}), namely, Vaiśravaṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Virūḍhaka, and Virūpākṣa, whose mission is to report on the activities of mankind to the gods of the Trāyastriṃśa heaven and who have pledged to protect the practitioners of the Dharma. Each universe has its own set of four. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-རྒྱང-ཕན-པ	 A school of thought that rejected the Vedas and other religious texts and considered only empirical knowledge and inference to be valid. More commonly known in later literature as Cārvāka and in its Anglicized form Charvaka. It preexisted and was contemporary with the early centuries of Buddhism. Its literature no longer exists unless one takes the ninth-century text Tattvopaplava­siṃha by Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa as associated with that school, which most scholars do not.|A school of thought that rejected the Vedas and other religious texts and considered only empirical knowledge and inference to be valid. More commonly known in later literature as Cārvāka and in its Anglicized form Charvaka. It preexisted and was contemporary with the early centuries of Buddhism. Its literature no longer exists unless one takes the ninth-century text Tattvopaplava­siṃha by Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa as associated with that school, which most scholars do not. 
ལྗགས-རིང-ཞིང-སྲབ-པ	Twenty-fifth of the thirty-two major marks.
པི-པི-ལིང	Piper longum.
སོར-མོ-རིང-བ	4th of the thirty-two major marks.
འདོད-པ-ལ-འདུན-པ	 First of the five obscurations.|First of the five obscurations. 
གྷོ-ཥ	Luffa aegyptiaca.
བཙུན-པ-བཅོམ-ལྡན-འདས	 Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nSee “Lord” or “Blessed One,” and also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121.| Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nSee “Lord” or “Blessed One,” and also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121. |Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\nSee “Lord” or “Blessed One,” and also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-121. 
གཤིན-རྗེ	 From Vedic times, the Lord of Death who directs the departed into the next realm of rebirth. | God of the lower realms. | Lord of death. | Lord of the dead in Indian mythology.| Lord of the dead in Indian mythology. | Lord of the dead. | The Lord of the Dead; name of the ruler over the netherworld. | The god of death. | The king of the preta realm. |From Vedic times, the Lord of Death who directs the departed into the next realm of rebirth. 
རྗེའི-སྲས	 A respectful address used by a wife to her husband.|A respectful address used by a wife to her husband. 
གཞིན-རྗེ	 Lord of Death.| Lord of Death. |Lord of Death. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-རྡོ-རྗེའི-རྒྱ-མཚོ	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
ལོ-ཙཱ-བ	 Honorific term for a Tibetan translator.|Honorific term for a Tibetan translator. 
ནག-ཚོ-ལོ-ཙཱ-བ	 1011–1064. His personal name was Tsultrim Gyalwa ({tshul khrims rgyal ba}). A translator who brought Atiśa to Tibet and wrote an important record of his travels to India.|1011–1064. His personal name was Tsultrim Gyalwa ({tshul khrims rgyal ba}). A translator who brought Atiśa to Tibet and wrote an important record of his travels to India. 
པདྨ	 The lotus flower or plant; euphemistic name for the female genital organ.|The lotus flower or plant; euphemistic name for the female genital organ. 
པད-མ	 A nāga king. | Nelumbo nucifera. True lotus with a central pericarp. The Indian or sacred lotus.\nred lotuses|Nelumbo nucifera. True lotus with a central pericarp. The Indian or sacred lotus.\nred lotuses 
ཀུ-མུ-ད	 Nymphaea pubescens. This night-blossoming water lily, which can be red, pink, or white, is not actually a lotus, since it does not have the lotus’s distinctive pericarp. Nevertheless it is commonly called the “night lotus.” It is also known as hairy water lily, because of the hairs on the stem and the underside of the leaves. | The water plant Nymphae esculenta. | This water lily, Nymphaea pubescens, can be pink or white and is sometimes incorrectly called a lotus. It flowers at night, and therefore is also called “night lotus.”\nwater lilies|Nymphaea pubescens. This night-blossoming water lily, which can be red, pink, or white, is not actually a lotus, since it does not have the lotus’s distinctive pericarp. Nevertheless it is commonly called the “night lotus.” It is also known as hairy water lily, because of the hairs on the stem and the underside of the leaves. 
ཀུ-མུ-ཏ	 Nymphaea pubescens. This night-blossoming water lily, which can be red, pink, or white, is not actually a lotus. It does not have the lotus’s distinctive pericarp. Nevertheless, it is commonly called the “night lotus.” It is also known as “hairy water lily,” because of the hairs on the stem and the underside of the leaves.|Nymphaea pubescens. This night-blossoming water lily, which can be red, pink, or white, is not actually a lotus. It does not have the lotus’s distinctive pericarp. Nevertheless, it is commonly called the “night lotus.” It is also known as “hairy water lily,” because of the hairs on the stem and the underside of the leaves. 
པད-མ-དཀར-པོ	 Nelumbo nucifera. The white variant of the red lotus, which is otherwise the same species.|Nelumbo nucifera. The white variant of the red lotus, which is otherwise the same species. 
པད-མོ-དཔལ-གྱི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of tathāgatas.|Realm of tathāgatas. 
ངན-འགྲོ-གསུམ	 The realms of hell beings, pretas and animals.|The realms of hell beings, pretas and animals. 
ངན-སོང-གསུམ	 A collective name for the realms of animals, anguished spirits, and denizens of the hells.|A collective name for the realms of animals, anguished spirits, and denizens of the hells. 
ཤམ-ཐབས	One of a Buddhist monk’s three robes. The term {sham thabs} (nivāsana) is the most widespread and is the one used throughout this text, except in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-2935 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-925 where the alternative term {mthang gos} (antarvāsa) is used.
མཐང-གོས	One of a Buddhist monk’s three robes. The term {sham thabs} (nivāsana) is the most widespread and is the one used throughout this text, except in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-2935 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-925 where the alternative term {mthang gos} (antarvāsa) is used.
ལུམ-བི-ནི	 The birth place of the Bodhisattva, located in southern Nepal.|The birth place of the Bodhisattva, located in southern Nepal. 
འོད-གསལ-བ	Luminosity refers to the subtlest level of mind, i.e., the fundamental, essential nature of all cognitive events. Though ever present within all sentient beings, this luminosity becomes manifest only when the gross mind has ceased to function. It is said that such a dissolution is experienced by ordinary beings, naturally, at the time of death, but it can also be experientially cultivated through certain meditative practices.
པི-བང	A traditional Indian stringed instrument, much like a sitar.
རྫུན-དུ-སྨྲ-བ	Fourth of the ten non-virtuous actions.
འཇམ-སྙན	 Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra.|Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
དབྱངས-སྙན	 Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra.|Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
དབུས-མ	 Teaching of the Middle Way.|Teaching of the Middle Way. 
དབུ-མ	Derived from the Sanskrit expression madhyamapratipad, meaning the “Middle Way” between the extremes of eternalism and nihilism, Madhyamaka is one of the most influential among the schools of Indian Buddhist philosophy since it emphasizes the deconstruction of all conceptual elaboration and the realization of emptiness. Various sub-schools evolved in India and Tibet, based on distinctions between relative and ultimate truth, the logical methodologies of reduction ad absurdum and syllogistic reasoning, and views concerning the nature of buddha attributes.
དབུས-མ-པ	 School based on Madhyamaka, and followers of that school.|School based on Madhyamaka, and followers of that school. 
དབུས-མཐའ-རྣམ-འབྱེད	 The “Analysis of the Middle and the Extremes,” it is an important work of Vijñānavāda philosophy, said to have been received as a revelation from the future Buddha Maitreya by the great scholar and saint, Āryāsaṅga, after twelve years of meditation.|The “Analysis of the Middle and the Extremes,” it is an important work of Vijñānavāda philosophy, said to have been received as a revelation from the future Buddha Maitreya by the great scholar and saint, Āryāsaṅga, after twelve years of meditation. 
མ-ག-དྷའ	 The largest kingdom of northern India during the time of the Buddha.|The largest kingdom of northern India during the time of the Buddha. 
མ-ག-དྷ	 A kingdom on the banks of the Ganges (in the southern part of the modern day Indian state of Bihar), whose capital was at Pāṭaliputra (modern day Patna). During the life of Śākyamuni Buddha, it was the dominant kingdom in north central India and is home to many of the most important Buddhist sites, including Bodh Gayā, Nālandā, and its capital Rājagṛha. | The ancient kingdom in what is now south Bihar. Its king, Bimbisāra, became a patron of Śakyāmuni.| The ancient kingdom in what is now south Bihar. Its king, Bimbisāra, became a patron of Śakyāmuni. | This ancient kingdom is in what is now southern Bihar, within which the Buddha attained enlightenment. During most of the life of the Buddha it was ruled by King Bimbisara. During the Buddha’s later years it began to expand greatly under the reign of King Ajataśatru. In the third century CE, during the reign of Aśoka, it become an empire that controlled most of India. |A kingdom on the banks of the Ganges (in the southern part of the modern day Indian state of Bihar), whose capital was at Pāṭaliputra (modern day Patna). During the life of Śākyamuni Buddha, it was the dominant kingdom in north central India and is home to many of the most important Buddhist sites, including Bodh Gayā, Nālandā, and its capital Rājagṛha. 
སྟོབས-ཆེན	 A king in the time of Buddha Ghoṣadatta.|A king in the time of Buddha Ghoṣadatta. 
མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས-ཆེན-པོས-ཟིལ-གྱིས-གནོན-པ	 A buddha in the distant past. Also the name of a prince in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. Also the name of a prince in the distant past. 
ཚངས-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 The personification of the universal force of Brahman, the deity in the form realm who was, during the Buddha’s time, considered the supreme deity and creator of the universe. In the cosmology of many universes, each with a trillion worlds, there are many such Brahmās with individual names. | Third god realm of form, meaning “great Brahmā.”| Third god realm of form, meaning “great Brahmā.” |The personification of the universal force of Brahman, the deity in the form realm who was, during the Buddha’s time, considered the supreme deity and creator of the universe. In the cosmology of many universes, each with a trillion worlds, there are many such Brahmās with individual names. 
ཁོར-ཡུག-ཆེན-པོ	 A mountain, or sometimes a range of mountains. | Means “Great Periphery.” Name of mountain range that surrounds the world according to Buddhist cosmology.| Means “Great Periphery.” Name of mountain range that surrounds the world according to Buddhist cosmology. | This appears to refer to the great circles of mountains that enclose a thousand worlds, each with its own Cakravāla. |A mountain, or sometimes a range of mountains. 
འཁོར-ཡུག-ཆེན-པོ	Name of a mountain range in Buddhist cosmology.
ཆོས-ཆེན	 One of the four kinnara kings.|One of the four kinnara kings. 
ཆེན-པོ-པ	 One of Upananda’s two novices whose homoerotic play led the Buddha to forbid allowing two novices to live together.|One of Upananda’s two novices whose homoerotic play led the Buddha to forbid allowing two novices to live together. 
ནག-པོ-ཆེན-པོ	 Not to be confused with the protectors in the later higher tantras in this sūtra, or with Śiva who also has this name (though then it has the alternative meaning of “Great Time”), in the Kāraṇḍavyūha these are dangerous spirits. Elsewhere they are also said to be servants of Śiva, which may be the meaning here as they are grouped with the mātṛ goddesses.| Not to be confused with the protectors in the later higher tantras in this sūtra, or with Śiva who also has this name (though then it has the alternative meaning of “Great Time”), in the Kāraṇḍavyūha these are dangerous spirits. Elsewhere they are also said to be servants of Śiva, which may be the meaning here as they are grouped with the mātṛ goddesses. |Not to be confused with the protectors in the later higher tantras in this sūtra, or with Śiva who also has this name (though then it has the alternative meaning of “Great Time”), in the Kāraṇḍavyūha these are dangerous spirits. Elsewhere they are also said to be servants of Śiva, which may be the meaning here as they are grouped with the mātṛ goddesses. 
ཀ-པི-ན-ཆེན-པོ	 Śrāvaka arhat.|Śrāvaka arhat. 
འོད-སྲུང-ཆེན-པོ	 A senior student of Buddha Śākyamuni, famous for his austere lifestyle. | Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. | Elder.| Elder. | Foremost disciple of the Buddha; he inherited the leadership of the saṅgha after the Parinirvāṇa. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-924. | One of the Buddha’s principal pupils, who became the Buddha’s successor on his passing. Also rendered here as “Kāśyapa.” | Śrāvaka arhat, one of the most important followers of the Buddha. |A senior student of Buddha Śākyamuni, famous for his austere lifestyle. 
ཀ-ཏྱའི-བུ-ཆེན-པོ	 (also Kātyāyana). Disciple of the Buddha noted for his skill in analysis of the Buddha’s discourses and, traditionally, the founder of the Abhidharma.|(also Kātyāyana). Disciple of the Buddha noted for his skill in analysis of the Buddha’s discourses and, traditionally, the founder of the Abhidharma. 
ཀཱ-ཏྱཱའི-བུ-ཆེན-པོ	 One of the ten principal pupils of the Buddha. He was renowned for his ability to understand the Buddha’s teachings. Also rendered as “Kātyāyana.” | Śrāvaka arhat.| Śrāvaka arhat. |One of the ten principal pupils of the Buddha. He was renowned for his ability to understand the Buddha’s teachings. Also rendered as “Kātyāyana.” 
གསུས-པོ-ཆེ	 Foremost among the Buddha’s pupils in analytic reasoning. | Śrāvaka arhat.| Śrāvaka arhat. |Foremost among the Buddha’s pupils in analytic reasoning. 
གསུས-པོ-ཆེ-ཆེན-པོ	 Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni.|Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni. 
ལུས-ཆེན	 One of the garuḍa kings present at the teaching of the sūtra.|One of the garuḍa kings present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
མཛོད-མང-པོ	 The cakravartin king who was the father of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū.|The cakravartin king who was the father of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. 
དཔལ-ཆེན-པོ	 One of the names of Lakṣmī.|One of the names of Lakṣmī. 
ལྷུན-པོ-ཆེན-པོ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
རི-བཏང-ཟུང-ཆེན-པོ	 A mountain.|A mountain. 
བཏང-བཟུང-ཆེན-པོ	 An unidentified mountain mentioned in a number of sūtras, not apparently connected to the well known nāga of that name (who is also known as Mucilinda), but perhaps to the sacred mucilinda tree, known in English mainly as the bayur tree. | See Mucilinda.| See Mucilinda. |An unidentified mountain mentioned in a number of sūtras, not apparently connected to the well known nāga of that name (who is also known as Mucilinda), but perhaps to the sacred mucilinda tree, known in English mainly as the bayur tree. 
ཕྱག-རྒྱ-ཆེན-པོ	 A very advanced practice that combines wisdom and means.|A very advanced practice that combines wisdom and means. 
མིང-ཆེན	 One of the Five Excellent Companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. | One of the first five disciples of the Buddha.| One of the first five disciples of the Buddha. | One of the five companions of Śākyamuni in asceticism and later one of his first five pupils, attaining the state of a stream entrant after three days, the fourth to attain that realization. He attained the state of an arhat on hearing the Sūtra on the Characteristics of Selflessness. Not to be confused with the cousin of the Buddha, who had the same name, and was a significant lay follower and patron. |One of the Five Excellent Companions, with whom Siddhārtha Gautama practiced asceticism near the Nairañjanā River and who later heard the Buddha first teach the Four Noble Truths at the Deer Park in Sarnath. 
པད-མ-ཆེན-པོ	 King of Magadha at the time of the Buddha’s birth, husband of Queen Bimbī, and father of Bimbisāra.|King of Magadha at the time of the Buddha’s birth, husband of Queen Bimbī, and father of Bimbisāra. 
པད-མ-ཆེ	 A nāga king.|A nāga king. 
འོད-ཆེན	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
སྐྱེ-དགུའི-བདག-མོ-ཆེན-མོ	 The Buddha’s mother’s sister and his step-mother. She was the mother of Nanda. She became the first bhikṣunī after the death of the Buddha’s father. Gautamī is the family name, the female equivalent to Gautama. The family line is said to descend from the Gautama who was one of the seven rishis that established the religion and culture of India. His sūtra specifies that a renunciant should be called a bhikṣu, have a shaved head, and wear yellow robes.|The Buddha’s mother’s sister and his step-mother. She was the mother of Nanda. She became the first bhikṣunī after the death of the Buddha’s father. Gautamī is the family name, the female equivalent to Gautama. The family line is said to descend from the Gautama who was one of the seven rishis that established the religion and culture of India. His sūtra specifies that a renunciant should be called a bhikṣu, have a shaved head, and wear yellow robes. 
སྐྱེ-དགུའི-བདག-མོ-ཆེན-མོ-གཽ-ཏ-མཱི	 The Buddha’s mother’s sister and his step-mother. She was the mother of Nanda. She became the first bhikṣunī after the death of the Buddha’s father. Gautamī is the family name, the female equivalent to Gautama. The family line is said to descend from the Gautama who was one of the seven rishis that established the religion and culture of India. His sūtra specifies that a renunciant should be called a bhikṣu, have a shaved head, and wear yellow robes.| The Buddha’s mother’s sister and his step-mother. She was the mother of Nanda. She became the first bhikṣunī after the death of the Buddha’s father. Gautamī is the family name, the female equivalent to Gautama. The family line is said to descend from the Gautama who was one of the seven rishis that established the religion and culture of India. His sūtra specifies that a renunciant should be called a bhikṣu, have a shaved head, and wear yellow robes. |The Buddha’s mother’s sister and his step-mother. She was the mother of Nanda. She became the first bhikṣunī after the death of the Buddha’s father. Gautamī is the family name, the female equivalent to Gautama. The family line is said to descend from the Gautama who was one of the seven rishis that established the religion and culture of India. His sūtra specifies that a renunciant should be called a bhikṣu, have a shaved head, and wear yellow robes. 
སྤོབས-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 A bodhisattva who appears mainly in chapters 11 and 12 of this sūtra. In the Chinese version, like other bodhisattvas who appear in the second half of the sūtra, considered to be of a later date than the first half, he is not in the initial list of bodhisattvas given in the first chapter.|A bodhisattva who appears mainly in chapters 11 and 12 of this sūtra. In the Chinese version, like other bodhisattvas who appear in the second half of the sūtra, considered to be of a later date than the first half, he is not in the initial list of bodhisattvas given in the first chapter. 
རྫོགས-ཆེན	 One of the four garuḍa kings, present at the teaching of the sūtra.|One of the four garuḍa kings, present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
རྒྱལ-པོ-ཆེན-པོ	 Four deities on the base of Mount Meru, each one the guardian of his direction: Vaiśravaṇa in the north, Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the east, Virūpākṣa in the west, and Virūḍhaka in the south.| Four deities on the base of Mount Meru, each one the guardian of his direction: Vaiśravaṇa in the north, Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the east, Virūpākṣa in the west, and Virūḍhaka in the south. |Four deities on the base of Mount Meru, each one the guardian of his direction: Vaiśravaṇa in the north, Dhṛtarāṣṭra in the east, Virūpākṣa in the west, and Virūḍhaka in the south. 
འོད-འཕྲོའི-ཕུང-པོ-ཆེན-པོ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
གཟུགས-ཆེན-པོ	 “Great Form.” The name of a past eon.|“Great Form.” The name of a past eon. 
ཆེར-འབྱུང-བ	 A world realm in the distant past.|A world realm in the distant past. 
ཕལ-ཆེན-སྡེ	 One of the eighteen nikāya schools.|One of the eighteen nikāya schools. 
དགེ-འདུན-ཕལ-ཆེན-པོའི-སྡེ	 One of the early schools of Buddhism, within which views such as the transcendence of the Buddha formed the basis for the rise of Mahāyāna.|One of the early schools of Buddhism, within which views such as the transcendence of the Buddha formed the basis for the rise of Mahāyāna. 
ཕལ-ཆེན-གྱི-སྡེ	One of the four main monastic orders of Indian Buddhism.
ངག-གི-དབང-ཕྱུག-མ-ཆེན-མོ	 Goddess of learning; in the SEV she is associated with Tārā; she is also one the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra.|Goddess of learning; in the SEV she is associated with Tārā; she is also one the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra. 
གྲུབ-ཐོབ-ཆེན-པོ	 A “Great Sorcerer,” a master of the esoteric teachings and practices of Mahāyāna Buddhism.|A “Great Sorcerer,” a master of the esoteric teachings and practices of Mahāyāna Buddhism. 
ཉན-ཐོས-ཆེན-པོ	 An epithet for the Buddha’s principal students who had attained the goal of the path. | Principal Hīnayāna pupils of the Buddha.| Principal Hīnayāna pupils of the Buddha. |An epithet for the Buddha’s principal students who had attained the goal of the path. 
དཔལ-ཆེན-མོ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra. 
གཟི-བརྗིད-ཆེན-པོ	 One of the four garuḍa kings, present at the teaching of the sūtra.|One of the four garuḍa kings, present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
རིག-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 Vidyā is synonymous with mantra. Although grammatically it is a female word, the Tibetan has it translated as a male noun.| Vidyā is synonymous with mantra. Although grammatically it is a female word, the Tibetan has it translated as a male noun. |Vidyā is synonymous with mantra. Although grammatically it is a female word, the Tibetan has it translated as a male noun. 
ཡི-གེ-དྲུག-པའི-རིག-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ. This appears to be a vocative call to Avalokiteśvara under the name of Maṇipadma (see Introduction, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html#UT22084-051-004-23). Ṣadakṣarī (q.v.) is also the name of the four-armed goddess who personifies the mantra.| Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ. This appears to be a vocative call to Avalokiteśvara under the name of Maṇipadma (see Introduction, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html#UT22084-051-004-23). Ṣadakṣarī (q.v.) is also the name of the four-armed goddess who personifies the mantra. |Oṁ maṇipadme hūṁ. This appears to be a vocative call to Avalokiteśvara under the name of Maṇipadma (see Introduction, http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html#UT22084-051-004-23). Ṣadakṣarī (q.v.) is also the name of the four-armed goddess who personifies the mantra. 
གནོན-པ-ཆེན-པོ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
ཆེར-བཀོད-པ	 The name of the universe in the distant past where the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja presided, and taught the prince Chandracchattra about the Dharma-worship (in the Epilogue).|The name of the universe in the distant past where the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja presided, and taught the prince Chandracchattra about the Dharma-worship (in the Epilogue). 
རྣལ-འབྱོར-ཆེན-པོའི-རྒྱུད	 A term used to describe the later tantras of the Yoga class that incoporated more transgressive pactices and a wrathful aesthetic. Typified by the Guhya­samāja­tantra and Guhya­garbha­tantra.\nGreat Yoga|A term used to describe the later tantras of the Yoga class that incoporated more transgressive pactices and a wrathful aesthetic. Typified by the Guhya­samāja­tantra and Guhya­garbha­tantra.\nGreat Yoga 
སྙིང-རྗེ-ཆེན-པོ-སེམས	 A prince who was a pupil of Buddha Abhāva­samudgata countless eons ago.|A prince who was a pupil of Buddha Abhāva­samudgata countless eons ago. 
མཽད-གལ-གྱི-བུ-ཆེན-པོ	 One of the chief śrāvakas, paired with Śāriputra. | One of the two principal pupils of the Buddha, along with Śariputra. He was renowned for miraculous powers. He was assassinated during the Buddha’s lifetime.| One of the two principal pupils of the Buddha, along with Śariputra. He was renowned for miraculous powers. He was assassinated during the Buddha’s lifetime. |One of the chief śrāvakas, paired with Śāriputra. 
མོཨོད-གལ-གྱི-བུ-ཆེན-པོ	 Śrāvaka arhat, one of the most important followers of the Buddha.|Śrāvaka arhat, one of the most important followers of the Buddha. 
མཽད-གལ-གྱི-བུ	 Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni. Also called in text Mahā­maudgalyāyana.\nMahā­maudgalyāyana | One of the chief śrāvakas, paired with Śāriputra. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-919. | One of the main śrāvaka disciples in the sūtras.| One of the main śrāvaka disciples in the sūtras. | The greatest miracle worker among the Buddha’s direct disciples. His relatives named him Maudgalyāyana in honor of his being a descendant of Mudgala. Respectfully referred to as Mahāmaudgalyāyana. |Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni. Also called in text Mahā­maudgalyāyana.\nMahā­maudgalyāyana 
ལྷུན-པོ-ཆེན-པོ-སྣང-བ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
འཕྲུལ-ཆེན-ཐོབ	 One of the four garuḍa kings, present at the teaching of the sūtra.|One of the four garuḍa kings, present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
མཐུ-ཆེན-ཐོབ-པ	 A bodhisattva.|A bodhisattva. 
མཐུ-ཆེན-ཐོབ	 One of the two principal bodhisattvas in Sukhāvatī and prominent in Chinese Buddhism. In Tibetan Buddhism he is identified with Vajrapāṇi.| One of the two principal bodhisattvas in Sukhāvatī and prominent in Chinese Buddhism. In Tibetan Buddhism he is identified with Vajrapāṇi. | One of the two principal bodhisattvas in Sukhāvatī, and prominent in Chinese Buddhism. In Tibetan Buddhism, he is identified with Vajrapāṇī, though they are separate bodhisattvas in the sūtras. |One of the two principal bodhisattvas in Sukhāvatī, and prominent in Chinese Buddhism. In Tibetan Buddhism, he is identified with Vajrapāṇī, though they are separate bodhisattvas in the sūtras. 
གནས-ཆེན-ཐོབ	 One of the two principal bodhisattvas in Sukhāvatī, and prominent in Chinese Buddhism. In Tibetan Buddhism, he is identified with Vajrapāṇī, though they are separate bodhisattvas in the sūtras.|One of the two principal bodhisattvas in Sukhāvatī, and prominent in Chinese Buddhism. In Tibetan Buddhism, he is identified with Vajrapāṇī, though they are separate bodhisattvas in the sūtras. 
དབང-ཕྱུག-ཆེན-པོ	 A common way of referring to Śiva, the great and omnipotent god of mainstream Hindu religion.| A common way of referring to Śiva, the great and omnipotent god of mainstream Hindu religion. | A name for Śiva. | One of the epithets of Śiva. | One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. Often synonymous with Īśvara, but sometimes presented as a separate deity. |One of the epithets of Śiva. 
དབང-ཕྱུག-ཆེ	 One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. Often synonymous with Īśvara, but sometimes presented as a separate deity.|One of the most frequently used names for Śiva. A deity of the jungles, named Rudra in the Vedas, he rose to prominence in the Purāṇic literature at the beginning of the first millennium. Often synonymous with Īśvara, but sometimes presented as a separate deity. 
མཧའི-ཎཾ	 A vetāla in one of the variants of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.|A vetāla in one of the variants of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. 
ལྟོ-འཕྱེ-ཆེན-པོ	 A class of nonhuman beings. | A class of subterranean geomantic spirits whose movement through the seasons and months of the year is deemed significant for construction projects. | A mythical serpent race. | A serpent deity that inhabits specific localities. | Human but nonhuman demons shaped like enormous serpents. | Large-bellied demon; literally “large stomach.” | The name of a particularly powerful preta. A malign local spirit.| The name of a particularly powerful preta. A malign local spirit. |Human but nonhuman demons shaped like enormous serpents. 
སྨན-ཆེན-པོ	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
མཻ-ཏྲེ-ཡ-སིཾ-ཧ-ལོ-ཙ-ནེ	 A goddess invoked in a mantra to cure blindness.|A goddess invoked in a mantra to cure blindness. 
གཟི-བརྗིད-ཡོད-པ	Name of the forty-second meditative stability.
ཆུ-སྲིན	 A fabled sea monster, the front part of which is a mammal. It is said to be the largest animal in the world, with the strongest bite. Its head is said to be a combination of the features of an elephant, a crocodile, and a boar. The name is also applied to the dugong, the crocodile (in particular the Mugger crocodile, whose name is even derived from makara ), and the dolphin, particularly the Ganges dolphin, because the Ganges goddess is said to ride on a makara.|A fabled sea monster, the front part of which is a mammal. It is said to be the largest animal in the world, with the strongest bite. Its head is said to be a combination of the features of an elephant, a crocodile, and a boar. The name is also applied to the dugong, the crocodile (in particular the Mugger crocodile, whose name is even derived from makara ), and the dolphin, particularly the Ganges dolphin, because the Ganges goddess is said to ride on a makara. 
རློམ-སེམས-སུ-བྱེད-པ	Make assumptions about, based on, or on account of something.
ཅོད-པན-སོ	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
བཱ-ཤ-ཀ	Justicia adhatoda.
ཕྲེང-འཛིན	 One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Meru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “with māla beads in their hands,” and they are said to be constantly counting and therefore unable to follow the path to enlightenment.|One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Meru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “with māla beads in their hands,” and they are said to be constantly counting and therefore unable to follow the path to enlightenment. 
ཕྲེང-ཐོགས	 One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Meru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “with māla beads in their hands,” and they are said to be constantly counting and therefore unable to follow the path to enlightenment.|One of the three classes of yakṣas at the base of Meru, below the paradises of the mahārājas, as part of the lowest class of paradises in the desire realm. Their name means “with māla beads in their hands,” and they are said to be constantly counting and therefore unable to follow the path to enlightenment. 
ཕྲེང-བ-འཆང	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
མ-ལ-ཡ	 The range of mountains in West India, also called the Western ghats, known for its sandalwood forests.|The range of mountains in West India, also called the Western ghats, known for its sandalwood forests. 
གྱད	 A kingdom of ancient India situated to the North of Magadha.|A kingdom of ancient India situated to the North of Magadha. 
མཱ-མ-ཀཱི	 Consort of Ratnasambhava.|Consort of Ratnasambhava. 
གཟི-ཅན	 One of the eight great nāga kings.|One of the eight great nāga kings. 
རྡུལ-ཚོན-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར	 A maṇḍala created with colored powders.|A maṇḍala created with colored powders. 
ཨམྲ	Mangifera indica
ནོར-བུ	 A nāga king.|A nāga king. 
ནོར-བཟངས	 A yakṣa.|A yakṣa. 
ནོར-བུ-བཟང-པོ	 God of wealth.|God of wealth. 
མངོན-གྱུར	The sixth bodhisattva bhūmi.
མངོན-སུམ-པ	The sixth bodhisattva bhūmi.
མངོན-པར-མི-དམིགས-པ	Name of the ninety-first meditative stability.
འཇམ-དབྱངས	 An alternative name for Mañjuśrī, meaning, “gentle or beautiful voice.” | Meaning “gentle or beautiful voice,” this is an alternative name for Mañjuśrī. It is synonymous with Mañjughoṣa, which is also translated into Tibetan as {'jam dbyangs}. See also “Mañjuśrī.”| Meaning “gentle or beautiful voice,” this is an alternative name for Mañjuśrī. It is synonymous with Mañjughoṣa, which is also translated into Tibetan as {'jam dbyangs}. See also “Mañjuśrī.” | Name of a tathāgata, a form of Mañjuśrī. | See “Mañjusvara.” |An alternative name for Mañjuśrī, meaning, “gentle or beautiful voice.” 
འཇམ-དཔལ	 A great bodhisattva, one of the eight “close sons” of the Buddha, the embodiment of wisdom. | Bodhisattva of wisdom. | Bodhisattva. | Name of a bodhisattva, “Beautiful Glory, Lovely Splendor.” | The bodhisattva who is considered the embodiment of wisdom. Also called “Mañjusvara” and “Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta.” | The bodhisattva who is considered the embodiment of wisdom. Also known as Mañjuśrī Kumārabhūta, Mañjughoṣa or Pañcaśikha. | The deified bodhisattva of wisdom; one of the original sixteen bodhisattvas. | The eternally youthful crown prince (kumārabhūta), so called because of his special identification with the Prajñā­pāramitā, or Transcendence of Wisdom. He is the only member of the Buddha’s retinue who volunteers to visit Vimalakīrti, and he serves as Vimalakīrti’s principal interlocutor throughout the sūtra. Traditionally regarded as the wisest of bodhisattvas, in Tibetan tradition he is known as {rgyal ba'i yab gcig}, the “sole father of buddhas,” as he inspires them in their realization of the profound. He is represented as bearing the sword of wisdom in his right hand and a volume of the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtra in his left. He is always youthful in appearance, like a boy of sixteen.\nMañjuśrī, the crown prince\ncrown prince Mañjuśrī\ncrown, prince Mañjuśrī\nMañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta| The eternally youthful crown prince (kumārabhūta), so called because of his special identification with the Prajñā­pāramitā, or Transcendence of Wisdom. He is the only member of the Buddha’s retinue who volunteers to visit Vimalakīrti, and he serves as Vimalakīrti’s principal interlocutor throughout the sūtra. Traditionally regarded as the wisest of bodhisattvas, in Tibetan tradition he is known as {rgyal ba'i yab gcig}, the “sole father of buddhas,” as he inspires them in their realization of the profound. He is represented as bearing the sword of wisdom in his right hand and a volume of the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtra in his left. He is always youthful in appearance, like a boy of sixteen.\nMañjuśrī, the crown prince\ncrown prince Mañjuśrī\ncrown, prince Mañjuśrī\nMañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta |The eternally youthful crown prince (kumārabhūta), so called because of his special identification with the Prajñā­pāramitā, or Transcendence of Wisdom. He is the only member of the Buddha’s retinue who volunteers to visit Vimalakīrti, and he serves as Vimalakīrti’s principal interlocutor throughout the sūtra. Traditionally regarded as the wisest of bodhisattvas, in Tibetan tradition he is known as {rgyal ba'i yab gcig}, the “sole father of buddhas,” as he inspires them in their realization of the profound. He is represented as bearing the sword of wisdom in his right hand and a volume of the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtra in his left. He is always youthful in appearance, like a boy of sixteen.\nMañjuśrī, the crown prince\ncrown prince Mañjuśrī\ncrown, prince Mañjuśrī\nMañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta 
འཇམ-དཔལ-གཞོན-ནུར-གྱུར-པ	 The bodhisattva who is considered the embodiment of wisdom, with the additional honorific title for a young man. Also rendered here as “Mañjusvara” and “Mañjuśrī.” | The bodhisattva who is considered the embodiment of wisdom, with the additional honorofic title for a young man. | The eternally youthful crown prince (kumārabhūta), so called because of his special identification with the Prajñā­pāramitā, or Transcendence of Wisdom. He is the only member of the Buddha’s retinue who volunteers to visit Vimalakīrti, and he serves as Vimalakīrti’s principal interlocutor throughout the sūtra. Traditionally regarded as the wisest of bodhisattvas, in Tibetan tradition he is known as {rgyal ba'i yab gcig}, the “sole father of buddhas,” as he inspires them in their realization of the profound. He is represented as bearing the sword of wisdom in his right hand and a volume of the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtra in his left. He is always youthful in appearance, like a boy of sixteen.\nMañjuśrī, the crown prince\ncrown prince Mañjuśrī\ncrown, prince Mañjuśrī\nMañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta| The eternally youthful crown prince (kumārabhūta), so called because of his special identification with the Prajñā­pāramitā, or Transcendence of Wisdom. He is the only member of the Buddha’s retinue who volunteers to visit Vimalakīrti, and he serves as Vimalakīrti’s principal interlocutor throughout the sūtra. Traditionally regarded as the wisest of bodhisattvas, in Tibetan tradition he is known as {rgyal ba'i yab gcig}, the “sole father of buddhas,” as he inspires them in their realization of the profound. He is represented as bearing the sword of wisdom in his right hand and a volume of the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtra in his left. He is always youthful in appearance, like a boy of sixteen.\nMañjuśrī, the crown prince\ncrown prince Mañjuśrī\ncrown, prince Mañjuśrī\nMañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta |The eternally youthful crown prince (kumārabhūta), so called because of his special identification with the Prajñā­pāramitā, or Transcendence of Wisdom. He is the only member of the Buddha’s retinue who volunteers to visit Vimalakīrti, and he serves as Vimalakīrti’s principal interlocutor throughout the sūtra. Traditionally regarded as the wisest of bodhisattvas, in Tibetan tradition he is known as {rgyal ba'i yab gcig}, the “sole father of buddhas,” as he inspires them in their realization of the profound. He is represented as bearing the sword of wisdom in his right hand and a volume of the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtra in his left. He is always youthful in appearance, like a boy of sixteen.\nMañjuśrī, the crown prince\ncrown prince Mañjuśrī\ncrown, prince Mañjuśrī\nMañjuśrī­kumāra­bhūta 
འཇམ-དཔལ-གཞོན-ནུ	 Name of a bodhisattva.|Name of a bodhisattva. 
འཇམ-དཔལ-གཞོན-ནུ-གྱུར-པ	 The bodhisattva Mañjuśrī; literally “Youthful Mañjuśrī.”| The bodhisattva Mañjuśrī; literally “Youthful Mañjuśrī.” |The bodhisattva Mañjuśrī; literally “Youthful Mañjuśrī.” 
འཇམ-དཔལ-གཞོན-ནུར-འགྱུར-པ	 Bodhisattva of wisdom and one of the Buddha's principal interlocutors in many sūtras.| Bodhisattva of wisdom and one of the Buddha's principal interlocutors in many sūtras. |Bodhisattva of wisdom and one of the Buddha's principal interlocutors in many sūtras. 
ཇམ-དཔལ-གཞོན-ནུར-གྱུར-པ	 “Mañjuśrī the ever youthful,” a common epithet of Mañjuśrī.|“Mañjuśrī the ever youthful,” a common epithet of Mañjuśrī. 
འཇམ-སྒྲ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
འཇམ-པའི-རྡོ-རྗེ	 Emanation of Mañjuśrī; the deity delivering the SEV.|Emanation of Mañjuśrī; the deity delivering the SEV. 
ཡིད-དུ-འོང-བ	 Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra.|Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra. 
ཡིད-འོང-དབྱངས	 Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra. Also present at the teaching of the Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra (http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html).|Gandharva king present at the teaching of the sūtra. Also present at the teaching of the Kāraṇḍavyūha Sūtra (http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html). 
ཡིད-དུ-འོང-བའི-སྒྲ-མངོན-པར-བསྒྲགས-པ	 Literally “The Resounding of Beautiful Sounds.” It is the name of the future eon in which Ānanda will attain buddhahood.|Literally “The Resounding of Beautiful Sounds.” It is the name of the future eon in which Ānanda will attain buddhahood. 
གསང-ཚིག	 Literally “an instrument of thought,” it is usually a brief verbal formula used in multiple repetitions, usually beginning with oṁ and in essence a salutation to a particular deity.|Literally “an instrument of thought,” it is usually a brief verbal formula used in multiple repetitions, usually beginning with oṁ and in essence a salutation to a particular deity. 
སྔགས-མདུད	 Knot which has been incanted with the mantra while being tied.|Knot which has been incanted with the mantra while being tied. 
ཡི-གེ-དྲུག-པ	 The four armed goddess who is the embodiment of the six-syllable mantra. Though female in Sanskrit, it is translated into Tibetan as a male name. | Ṣadakṣarī (q.v.) is also the name of the four-armed goddess who personifies the mantra. See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.”| Ṣadakṣarī (q.v.) is also the name of the four-armed goddess who personifies the mantra. See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.” |Ṣadakṣarī (q.v.) is also the name of the four-armed goddess who personifies the mantra. See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.” 
སྔགས-ཀྱི-ཐེག-པ	 The “Mantra Vehicle,” which is another name for Vajrayāna.|The “Mantra Vehicle,” which is another name for Vajrayāna. 
ཤེད	 In the Indian tradition, Manu, similar to Noah in the Biblical tradition, was the survivor of a flood that covered the world, and so is the ancestor of all humans. On divine advice, he built a boat in which he saved his family and all the plants, seeds, and animals necessary to reintroduce to the world after the flood had diminished.| In the Indian tradition, Manu, similar to Noah in the Biblical tradition, was the survivor of a flood that covered the world, and so is the ancestor of all humans. On divine advice, he built a boat in which he saved his family and all the plants, seeds, and animals necessary to reintroduce to the world after the flood had diminished. |In the Indian tradition, Manu, similar to Noah in the Biblical tradition, was the survivor of a flood that covered the world, and so is the ancestor of all humans. On divine advice, he built a boat in which he saved his family and all the plants, seeds, and animals necessary to reintroduce to the world after the flood had diminished. 
ཤེད-ཅན	 In the Indian tradition, Manu, similar to Noah in the Biblical tradition, was the survivor of a flood that covered the world, and so is the ancestor of all humans. On divine advice, he built a boat in which he saved his family and all the plants, seeds, and animals necessary to reintroduce to the world after the flood had diminished.| In the Indian tradition, Manu, similar to Noah in the Biblical tradition, was the survivor of a flood that covered the world, and so is the ancestor of all humans. On divine advice, he built a boat in which he saved his family and all the plants, seeds, and animals necessary to reintroduce to the world after the flood had diminished. |In the Indian tradition, Manu, similar to Noah in the Biblical tradition, was the survivor of a flood that covered the world, and so is the ancestor of all humans. On divine advice, he built a boat in which he saved his family and all the plants, seeds, and animals necessary to reintroduce to the world after the flood had diminished. 
ཤེད-བུ	 Manu being the archetypal human, the progenitor of mankind, in the Mahā­bhārata, the Purāṇas, and other Indian texts, “son of Manu” is a synonym of “human being” or mankind in general. Also rendered “born of Manu.”| Manu being the archetypal human, the progenitor of mankind, in the Mahā­bhārata, the Purāṇas, and other Indian texts, “son of Manu” is a synonym of “human being” or mankind in general. Also rendered “born of Manu.” |Manu being the archetypal human, the progenitor of mankind, in the Mahā­bhārata, the Purāṇas, and other Indian texts, “son of Manu” is a synonym of “human being” or mankind in general. Also rendered “born of Manu.” 
བདུད-ཀྱི-རིས	 The deities ruled over by Māra. This can also mean the devas in his paradise, which is sometimes identified with the Paranirmitavaśavartin, the highest paradise in the “realm of desire,” which incudes all ordinary samsaric existences.|The deities ruled over by Māra. This can also mean the devas in his paradise, which is sometimes identified with the Paranirmitavaśavartin, the highest paradise in the “realm of desire,” which incudes all ordinary samsaric existences. 
སྨིག-རྒྱུ	 Universe of the Buddha Duṣprasāhā.|Universe of the Buddha Duṣprasāhā. 
མཱར-ཀཎ-ཌ	A famous Puranic rishi of India, who features particularly in the Shaivite literature.
མརྒ-ཏི	 Galedupa piscidia.|Galedupa piscidia. 
བྷལླ-ཏ-ཀ	Semecarpus anacardium.
མར-པ-ཆོས-ཀྱི-བློ-གྲོས	(1012 - 1097) Tibetan translator and lay practitioner from Lhodrak, traveled several times to Nepal and India to receive tantric Buddhist teachings, notably from Nāropa and Maitripā, and in Tibet established an important set of lineages through his “four pillar” disciples Milarepa, Ngoktön Chöku Dorje, Tshurtön Wangki Dorje, and Metön Tshönpo.\nMarpa
ཀོ-ཀི-ལཱ-ཀྱ	Hygrophila auriculata.
རྨད-དུ-བྱུང-བའི-སྡེ	Tenth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.
མ-ཥ	 A unit of weight equal to 17 grains troy.|A unit of weight equal to 17 grains troy. 
མ-Sཨ	 Phaseolus radiatus.| Phaseolus radiatus. |Phaseolus radiatus. 
མ-ཤ-ཀ	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1095.\nmeasures|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1095.\nmeasures 
དྲུག-ནམ	 A unit of weight equal to 26 grains of rice.|A unit of weight equal to 26 grains of rice. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-རྒྱུ-གནག-ལྷས-ཀྱི-བུ	 One of the six outsider teachers.|One of the six outsider teachers. 
གཞན-འཕྲུལ-དབང-བྱེད	 Sixth god realm of desire, meaning “mastery over transformations.”| Sixth god realm of desire, meaning “mastery over transformations.” | The highest paradise in the desire realm. |The highest of the six levels of gods of the Desire Realm. 
པོག	A resin from the mastic tree (Pistaci lentsicus), mainly cultivated from Greece to Persia, but was used in ancient India. Sanskrit dictionaries have conflated this with frankincense.
དཔེ-མེད-པ	The twelfth bodhisattva level.
རིལ-པོར-འཛིན-པ	The sense, which ordinarily binds us, of the “objective” solidity and physical reality of things.
གནས-ལེན-གྱི-བུ	 A learned brahmin and author of “Māṭhara’s Treatise.” He was also the grandfather of Upatiṣya, that is Śāriputra.|A learned brahmin and author of “Māṭhara’s Treatise.” He was also the grandfather of Upatiṣya, that is Śāriputra. 
བློ-མ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī. 
བློ-གྲོས	 A prince in the distant past.| A prince in the distant past. | A prince who was a former life of Śākyamuni. |A prince who was a former life of Śākyamuni. 
བུ-མེད	 Also called Mātarā and Mātṛkā. Normally seven or eight in number, these goddesses are considered dangerous, but have a more positive role in the tantra tradition.| Also called Mātarā and Mātṛkā. Normally seven or eight in number, these goddesses are considered dangerous, but have a more positive role in the tantra tradition. |Also called Mātarā and Mātṛkā. Normally seven or eight in number, these goddesses are considered dangerous, but have a more positive role in the tantra tradition. 
མ-བསད-པ	One class of person barred from joining the renunciate order.
མ-མོ	 An early name for the abhidharmapiṭaka and also a germinal list or index of topics.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1192.| An early name for the abhidharmapiṭaka and also a germinal list or index of topics.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1192. |An early name for the abhidharmapiṭaka and also a germinal list or index of topics.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1192. 
སྐྱོན-མ-མཆིས-པ	While “immaturity” (āma, {skyon}) suggests rawness—something that is uncooked, unrefined, and flawed— here the term “maturity” implies certitude, refinement, cooking, softening, and flawlessness.
སྐྱོན-མེད	While “immaturity” (āma, {skyon}) suggests rawness—something that is uncooked, unrefined, and flawed— here the term “maturity” implies certitude, refinement, cooking, softening, and flawlessness.
མཽད-གལ-རིགས	 “Of the family of Mudgala.” Alternative name for Maudgalyāyana (descendant of Mudgala). One of the two principal pupils of the Buddha.|“Of the family of Mudgala.” Alternative name for Maudgalyāyana (descendant of Mudgala). One of the two principal pupils of the Buddha. 
མཽདགལ-གྱི-བུ	 One of the two principal pupils of the Buddha, renowned for miraculous powers. He was assassinated during the Buddha’s lifetime. His family clan was descended from Mudgala, hence his name Maudgalyāyana, “the son of Mudgala’s descendants.” See also under Kolita, his other name.|One of the two principal pupils of the Buddha, renowned for miraculous powers. He was assassinated during the Buddha’s lifetime. His family clan was descended from Mudgala, hence his name Maudgalyāyana, “the son of Mudgala’s descendants.” See also under Kolita, his other name. 
ལྷ-མོ-སྒྱུ-འཕྲུལ	 Buddha Śākyamuni’s mother. | Buddha’s mother.| Buddha’s mother. |Buddha Śākyamuni’s mother. 
གཞི-མེད-པའི-དོན	meaningless
བསྡུ-བའི-དངོས-པོ	 Four ways in which a bodhisattva forms a group of people united by the common aim of practicing the Dharma: giving (dāna); pleasant speech (priyavaditā); accomplishment of the aims (of others) by teaching Dharma (arthacaryā); and consistency of behavior with the teaching (samānārthatā).|These are traditionally listed as four: generosity, kind talk, meaningful actions, and practicing what one preaches. 
ཡིད-གཞུངས-མ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī. 
འབྲས-བུའི-སྨན	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ལོ-མའི-སྨན	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
རྩ-བའི-སྨན	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
སྡོང-བུའི-སྨན	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-མཉམ-པ-ཉིད	 Name of the 104th meditative stability.| Name of the 104th meditative stability. |Name of the 104th meditative stability. 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-གྱི-སྟོབས	 Fourth of the five powers.| Fourth of the five powers. |Fourth of the five powers. 
སྤྲིན-སྒྲ-མར-མེ	 A buddha in the northern direction.|A buddha in the northern direction. 
སྤྲིན-སྒྲ-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha in the northern direction. Also the name of millions of buddhas in the distant past.|A buddha in the northern direction. Also the name of millions of buddhas in the distant past. 
སྤྲིན-དང-རྔ-སྒྲ-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha in the distant past. Also the name of a prince in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. Also the name of a prince in the distant past. 
དམན-པའི-སྤྱོད-པ	A monk serving a punitive sentence must perform five kinds of menial deeds that entail his adopting the subservient role of a penitent.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Twefth of the twelve sense fields| Twefth of the twelve sense fields |Twefth of the twelve sense fields 
སེམས-ཀྱི-མཚན-མ	 A high level of absorption reached through mastery of concentration.|A high level of absorption reached through mastery of concentration. 
སེམས-པའི-ཟས	 Third of the four nourishments.|Third of the four nourishments. 
རྗེའུ-རིགས	 The caste of merchants and farmers of classical Indian society. | The merchant caste.| The merchant caste. | The third of the four classes in the Indian caste system. It generally includes the merchants and farmers. |Third of the four classes of traditional Indian society. 
བསོད-ནམས	 Merit refers to the wholesome tendencies imprinted in the mind as a result of positive and skillful thoughts, words, and actions that ripen in the experience of happiness and well-being. According to the Greater Vehicle, it is important to dedicate the merit of one's wholesome actions to the benefit of all sentient beings, ensuring that others also experience the results of the positive actions generated.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2078).|Positive activity that is conducive to happiness and freedom from suffering. 
བསོད-ནམས-དང-ཡེ-ཤེས-ཀྱི-ཚོགས	 The two great stores to be accumulated by bodhisattvas: the store of merit, arising from their practice of the first three transcendences, and the store of wisdom, arising from their practice of the last two transcendences. All deeds of bodhisattvas contribute to their accumulation of these two stores, which ultimately culminate in the two bodies of the Buddha, the body of form and the ultimate body.| The two great stores to be accumulated by bodhisattvas: the store of merit, arising from their practice of the first three transcendences, and the store of wisdom, arising from their practice of the last two transcendences. All deeds of bodhisattvas contribute to their accumulation of these two stores, which ultimately culminate in the two bodies of the Buddha, the body of form and the ultimate body. |The two great stores to be accumulated by bodhisattvas: the store of merit, arising from their practice of the first three transcendences, and the store of wisdom, arising from their practice of the last two transcendences. All deeds of bodhisattvas contribute to their accumulation of these two stores, which ultimately culminate in the two bodies of the Buddha, the body of form and the ultimate body. 
རི-རབ	 A gigantic mountain which forms the center of the universe in classical Indian cosmology. | According to the ancient Indian cosmological system, Mount Meru is a mountain which forms the centre of the universe. | In Buddhist cosmology, the sacred mountain at the center of the world. | See “Meru.” | The mountain at the center of the disc of the world with the four continents around it. | The mountain in the center of the disc of the world, with the four continents around it. See also “Meru.”| The mountain in the center of the disc of the world, with the four continents around it. See also “Meru.” |According to the ancient Indian cosmological system, Mount Meru is a mountain which forms the centre of the universe. 
ལྷུན-པོ	 Early Mahāyāna sūtras identify this as separate from Sumeru, the mountain at the center of the world. This refers to a legendary mountain in such epics as the Mahābhārata, which while sacred is not situated at the world’s center. | Early Mahāyāna sūtras identify this as separate from Sumeru, the mountain at the center of the world. This refers to a legendary mountain in such epics as the Mahābhārata, which, while sacred, is not situated in the world’s center. This is presumably identical to the Mount Meru that is the source of one of the two main tributaries of the Ganges and lies within the territory of India. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | The highest mountain at the center of our world according to traditional Buddhist cosmology. |Early Mahāyāna sūtras identify this as separate from Sumeru, the mountain at the center of the world. This refers to a legendary mountain in such epics as the Mahābhārata, which while sacred is not situated at the world’s center. 
ལྷུན-པོའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 Buddhafield beyond buddhafields as numerous as the sands of thirty-six Ganges rivers, administered by the Buddha Meru­pradīpa­rāja, whence Vimalakīrti obtains the lion-thrones on which he seats his visitors.|Buddhafield beyond buddhafields as numerous as the sands of thirty-six Ganges rivers, administered by the Buddha Meru­pradīpa­rāja, whence Vimalakīrti obtains the lion-thrones on which he seats his visitors. 
ལྷུན-པོ-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ལྷུན-པོ-ལྟ-བུ	 A buddha in the northwestern direction.|A buddha in the northwestern direction. 
ལྷུན-པོ-བརྩེགས-པ	 A buddha who resides in the eastern direction.|A buddha who resides in the eastern direction. 
ལྷུན-པོའི-སྒྲོན-མ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ལྷུན-པོའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 (The rendering Merugāja is according to Dutt.)|(The rendering Merugāja is according to Dutt.) 
ལྷུན-པོའི-གླན-ཆེན	 (The rendering Merugāja is according to Dutt.)|(The rendering Merugāja is according to Dutt.) 
ལྷུན-པོའི-སྒྲོན-མའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 Buddha of the universe Merudhvaja.|Buddha of the universe Merudhvaja. 
བསྡུ-བ	Generosity, pleasant speech, beneficial conduct, and conduct that accords with the wishes of disciples.
ཡུལ-དབུས	Most of the Buddha’s life and ministry took place in the Middle Country. Its land extended to the Likara Forest in the east; the city of Śarāvatī and the Śarāvatī River in the south; the brahmin towns of Sthūṇa and Upasthūṇa in the west; and Uśīragiri in the north.
ཤོ-ན-ཀ	Oroxylum indicum.
ཀླུ-ཆེན-པོ	 This term, meaning “elephant” in this context‌, is a metaphor, suggesting that those present in the assembly were leaders of considerable stature rather than followers.|This term, meaning “elephant” in this context‌, is a metaphor, suggesting that those present in the assembly were leaders of considerable stature rather than followers. 
སེམས	 Also translated here as “mind” and “mindset.”| Also translated here as “mind” and “thought.” |Also translated here as “mindset” and “thought.” 
ཡིད-རྩེ-གཅིག	 The mind focused one-pointedly.|The mind focused one-pointedly. 
སེམས-གནས-པ	 Name of the fifty-second meditative stability.|Name of the fifty-second meditative stability. 
ཟླ-བའི-ཐུགས	 A buddha.| A buddha. |A buddha. 
དྲན-པ-ཉེ-བ-གཞག-པ	There are four kinds of mindfulness: those of body, sensations, mind, and phenomena.
མེ-ལོང-ལྟ-བུའི-ཡེ-ཤེས	 One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Akṣobhya or Vairocana (depending on the system).|One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Akṣobhya or Vairocana (depending on the system). 
འགྲོས	Literally, “gait” or “way of moving,” but also more metaphorically “demeanour,” “stance;” and abstractly “manner,” “type,” “mode.”
བུ-རམ-གྱི-དབུ-བ	An acceptable form of medicine for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
གཙུག-ལག-ཁང	Originally a place where the wandering “viharin” monks would stay during the monsoon only, they later developed into permanent domiciles for monks.
རྡུལ-ཟན	This appears to be another name for the cloak called saṃkakṣikā. It is listed as one of the extra two robes for a bhikṣuni, which covers the body, but in the Sarvāstivādavinaya, it is mentioned only twice, and both times in relation to bhikṣus. The Buddha says bhikṣus should cover their bodies with this cloak so their chest is not visible when they go on alms rounds in villages. The two Tibetan spelling variants mean either “sweat robe” or “dust robe.”
རྔུལ-ཟན	This appears to be another name for the cloak called saṃkakṣikā. It is listed as one of the extra two robes for a bhikṣuni, which covers the body, but in the Sarvāstivādavinaya, it is mentioned only twice, and both times in relation to bhikṣus. The Buddha says bhikṣus should cover their bodies with this cloak so their chest is not visible when they go on alms rounds in villages. The two Tibetan spelling variants mean either “sweat robe” or “dust robe.”
དགེ-འདུན	 Community. | The community of followers of the Buddha’s teachings, particularly the monastics. | The community of followers of the Buddha’s teachings, particulary the monastics. | The community of followers of the Buddha’s teachings, see also “Three Precious Jewels.”| The community of followers of the Buddha’s teachings, see also “Three Precious Jewels.” | The spiritual communities of ordained practitioners, both monks and nuns. | The third of the Three Jewels (Triratna) of Buddhism, the Buddha, the Teaching, and the Community. Sometimes narrowly defined as the community of mendicants, it can be understood as including lay practitioners. |The spiritual communities of ordained practitioners, both monks and nuns. 
མཁན-པོ	 A personal preceptor and teacher. Also In Tibet, the translation {mkhan po} also came to mean a learned scholar, the equivalent of a paṇḍita. | A personal preceptor and teacher. In Tibet, it has also come to mean a learned scholar, the equivalent of a paṇḍita, but that is not the intended meaning in the Kāraṇḍavyūha.| A personal preceptor and teacher. In Tibet, it has also come to mean a learned scholar, the equivalent of a paṇḍita, but that is not the intended meaning in the Kāraṇḍavyūha. | A personal preceptor and teacher. In Tibet, the translation {mkhan po} also came to mean a learned scholar, the equivalent of a paṇḍita.\npreceptor | An office decreed by the Buddha so that aspirants would not have to receive ordination from the Buddha in person. The Buddha identified two types: those who grant entry into the renunciate order and those who grant ordination. | One who presides over the monastic ordination ceremony of new monks. | Teacher, (monastic) preceptor; “having approached him, one studies from him” (upetyādhīyate asmāt). |One who presides over the monastic ordination ceremony of new monks. 
དགེ-སློང-ཞལ-ཏ-བྱེད-པ	 A monk in charge of providing for monastery residents and visitors. One of several official administrative or managerial positions at a monastery.|A monk in charge of providing for monastery residents and visitors. One of several official administrative or managerial positions at a monastery. 
ཞུ-བའི-དགེ-སློང	 The monk who acts as intermediary between a candidate for ordination and the saṅgha.| The monk who acts as intermediary between a candidate for ordination and the saṅgha. |The monk who acts as intermediary between a candidate for ordination and the saṅgha. 
དགེ-སློང-གི-དངོས-པོ	Also, according to certain usage, a phrase used in the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya in praise of monks fully committed to the monastic ideal, as opposed especially to those who merely wear the robes.
དགེ-སློང-རྙེད-པ-སྟོབས-པ	A rations officer. One of several official administrative or managerial positions at a monastery.
ཞལ-ཟླ-བ-ཉ-བ-ལྟ-བུ	 Twenty-seventh or thirty-first of the thirty-two major marks.| Twenty-seventh or thirty-first of the thirty-two major marks. |Twenty-seventh or thirty-first of the thirty-two major marks. 
སླེ-ཏྲེས	Tinaspora cordifolia.
ཤིན-ཏུ-དྲི-ལྡན	A world system.
གསོལ-བ	A formal request, e.g. that a postulant be accepted into the renunciate order or that a monk serve as preceptor granting ordination, etc.
ཆུ-སྲིན-བྱིས-པ-གསོད-ལྟ-བུའི-རི	 Sometimes has the alternative Sanskrit spelling Śiśumāragiri.|Sometimes has the alternative Sanskrit spelling Śiśumāragiri. 
རི-ཕུག	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཞལ-ཡོངས-སུ-རྒྱས-པ	Twenty-fourth of the eighty minor marks.
ཞལ-དྲི-ཞིམ-པ	Forty-first of the eighty minor marks.
ཞལ-ཧ-ཅང-ཡང-མི-རིང-བ	Twenty-first of the eighty minor marks.
ཞལ-རྐང-རྐོང-མེད-པ	Twenty-second of the eighty minor marks.
སྲོག-དང-རྩོལ-བ	The manipulation of breath by means of yogic exercise. The Tibetan translation of the Sanskrit compound prāṇāyāma is more usually the compound {srog rtsol}.
རྫ-རྔ	 A kettledrum played horizontally, wider in the middle, with the skin at both ends played with the hands. One drumhead is smaller than the other. It is a South Indian drum, and maintains the rhythm in Karnataka music.|A kettledrum played horizontally, wider in the middle, with the skin at both ends played by the hands. One drumhead is smaller than the other. It is a South Indian drum, and maintains the rhythm in Karnataka music. 
རི-དགས-མགོ	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.|Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. 
རི-བཏང-བཟུང	 A mountain.|A mountain. 
བཏང-བཟུང	 An unidentified mountain mentioned in a number of sūtras, not apparently connected to the well-known nāga of that name, but perhaps to the sacred mucilinda tree, known in English mainly as the bayur tree.| An unidentified mountain mentioned in a number of sūtras, not apparently connected to the well-known nāga of that name, but perhaps to the sacred mucilinda tree, known in English mainly as the bayur tree. |An unidentified mountain mentioned in a number of sūtras, not apparently connected to the well-known nāga of that name, but perhaps to the sacred mucilinda tree, known in English mainly as the bayur tree. 
བཏང-བཟང	 Nāga king, particularly known for sheltering the Buddha from a storm in Bodhgaya.|Nāga king, particularly known for sheltering the Buddha from a storm in Bodhgaya. 
ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 A position of hands, also the “source” deity visualized at the top of the head.|A position of hands, also the “source” deity visualized at the top of the head. 
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡང-དག-པར-འདུ-བ-རྒྱ-མཚོའི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 Name of the twenty-first meditative stability.| Name of the twenty-first meditative stability. |Name of the twenty-first meditative stability. 
སྤེན-ཏོག-རྒྱན	 A specific kind of ancient Indian ornament, probably meaning “flower on the front” or “face with a flower.” It was made by metallurgists, presumably from gold. The Tibetan has a definition which involves a woman’s face. It is probably a central feature of a necklace, in which there is a face and a flower—possibly a face within a flower as is seen on ancient stūpa railings such as those in Bodhgaya.|A specific kind of ancient Indian ornament, probably meaning “flower on the front” or “face with a flower.” It was made by metallurgists, presumably from gold. The Tibetan has a definition which involves a woman’s face. It is probably a central feature of a necklace, in which there is a face and a flower—possibly a face within a flower as is seen on ancient stūpa railings such as those in Bodhgaya. 
མེ-ཏོག-རྒྱན	 A specific kind of ancient Indian ornament, probably meaning “flower on the front” or “face with a flower.” It was made by metallurgists, presumably from gold. The Tibetan has a definition which involves a woman’s face. It is probably a central feature of a necklace, in which there is a face and a flower—possibly a face within a flower as is seen on ancient stūpa railings such as those in Bodhgaya.|A specific kind of ancient Indian ornament, probably meaning “flower on the front” or “face with a flower.” It was made by metallurgists, presumably from gold. The Tibetan has a definition which involves a woman’s face. It is probably a central feature of a necklace, in which there is a face and a flower—possibly a face within a flower as is seen on ancient stūpa railings such as those in Bodhgaya. 
རྔ-ཟླུམ	This appears to be a small version of the mṛdaṅga drum.
རྩ-བ	 The root (literally and figuratively); also the seventeenth (sometimes the nineteenth) lunar asterism.|The root (literally and figuratively); also the seventeenth (sometimes the nineteenth) lunar asterism. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-པའི-ཆོས	 These are often listed as eight in number, as in the commentary: gain and no gain, happiness and suffering, praise and criticism, fame and lack of fame.| These comprise the five psycho-physical aggregates, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, the ten virtuous actions, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless absorptions, and the five extrasensory powers. |These comprise the five psycho-physical aggregates, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, the ten virtuous actions, the four meditative concentrations, the four immeasurable aspirations, the four formless absorptions, and the five extrasensory powers. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-ཐམས-ཅད-ལ-མངོན-པར-མི-དགའ-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Sixth of the six aspects of perception.| Sixth of the six aspects of perception. |Sixth of the six aspects of perception. 
མུཎྜ-རཱི	 Not identified, but perhaps Nardostachys jatamansi (?).|Not identified, but perhaps Nardostachys jatamansi (?). 
ཐུབ-པ	 A title that, like buddha, is given to someone who has attained the realization of a truth through his own contemplation and not by divine revelation.| An ancient title, derived from the verb man (“to contemplate”), given to someone who has attained the realization of a truth through their own contemplation and not by divine revelation. |A title that, like buddha, is given to someone who has attained the realization of a truth through his own contemplation and not by divine revelation. 
རྫ-རྔ-ཆེན-པོ	A kettledrum with ends played horizontally. Unlike the mṛdaṅga, one half of the drum is wider than the other. Another description says that the heads of the drum are smaller than those of the mṛdaṅga.
དར-ལ	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
སྐེ-ཚེ	Brassica juncea.
ཡུངས-ཀར	This plant has several edible varieties.
འབྲས-བུ-གསུམ	 The combination of Phyllanthus emblica, Terminala chebula, and Terminalia bellerica.|The combination of Phyllanthus emblica, Terminala chebula, and Terminalia bellerica. 
ཆུ-ཀླུང-འོད-སྲུང	 Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.| Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. | The brother of Gayākāśyapa and Uru­vilvā­kāśyapa. A practitioner of fire offering at Uruvilvā (Bodhgaya), he and his three hundred pupils were converted to becoming bhikṣus of the Buddha. He and his brothers and their pupils were the third group to become followers of the Buddha after his enlightenment. |The brother of Gayākāśyapa and Uru­vilvā­kāśyapa. A practitioner of fire offering at Uruvilvā (Bodhgaya), he and his three hundred pupils were converted to becoming bhikṣus of the Buddha. He and his brothers and their pupils were the third group to become followers of the Buddha after his enlightenment. 
ཀླུ	 A class of nonhuman beings, half-human and half-snake. | A class of serpentine water spirits and repositors of subaquatic and subterranean treasure. | A semi-divine being similar to a large snake. | A semidivine class of beings who live in subterranean aquatic environments and who are known to hoard wealth and esoteric teachings. They are associated with snakes and serpents. | Class of beings believed to have a snake body. There are both powerful and powerless types of nāgas. | Class of semi-divine serpent-like beings. | In India, this was the cobra deity, which in Tibet was equated with water spirits and in China with dragons, neither country having cobras. | Nāgas are associated with springs, streams, rivers, and water in general, and among their many magical powers are the ability to produce rain.| Nāgas are associated with springs, streams, rivers, and water in general, and among their many magical powers are the ability to produce rain. | Nāgas are serpent-like animals who live (invisibly) in the human realm and have an ambivalent status, on occasion positive but also frequently harmful. | One of the lords of the ocean, appearing as a great, many headed, sea dragon. | Snake-like mystical creature with supernatural powers belonging to the animal realm. |A semidivine class of beings who live in subterranean aquatic environments and who are known to hoard wealth and esoteric teachings. They are associated with snakes and serpents. 
ཀླུ-ཤིང	 A species of euphorbia used in burnt offerings to get rid of nāga influences.| A species of euphorbia used in burnt offerings to get rid of nāga influences. |A species of euphorbia used in burnt offerings to get rid of nāga influences. 
ཀླུའི-མཐུ	 Among the many magical powers of the nāgas are the ability to produce rain. Presumably this ability is what is meant here by “nāga-power,” although this appears to be the only mention of the term in the Kangyur in connection with clouds and rain.| Among the many magical powers of the nāgas are the ability to produce rain. Presumably this ability is what is meant here by “nāga-power,” although this appears to be the only mention of the term in the Kangyur in connection with clouds and rain. |Among the many magical powers of the nāgas are the ability to produce rain. Presumably this ability is what is meant here by “nāga-power,” although this appears to be the only mention of the term in the Kangyur in connection with clouds and rain. 
ཀླུའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-རྒྱ-མཚོ	 Name of a king of a race of supernatural serpents who protect the doctrine.| Name of a king of a race of supernatural serpents who protect the doctrine. |Name of a king of a race of supernatural serpents who protect the doctrine. 
ནཱ-ག-གེ-ས-ར	 Mesua ferrea; cobra’s saffron.|Mesua ferrea; cobra’s saffron. 
ཀླུ-སྒྲུབ	 Saint, scholar, and mystic of Buddhist India from about four hundred years after the Buddha; discoverer of the Mahāyāna sūtras and author of the fundamental Madhyamaka treatise. | Second- or third-century Indian master whose writings formed the basis for the Madhyamaka tradition. In following centuries there were other masters and authors of the same name, and in Tibet all their works became attributed to one person.| Second- or third-century Indian master whose writings formed the basis for the Madhyamaka tradition. In following centuries there were other masters and authors of the same name, and in Tibet all their works became attributed to one person. |Saint, scholar, and mystic of Buddhist India from about four hundred years after the Buddha; discoverer of the Mahāyāna sūtras and author of the fundamental Madhyamaka treatise. 
ཀླུ-གྲུབ	 Indian commentator (fl. second century).|Indian commentator (fl. second century). 
ཀླུ-མོ	 Female nāga.| Female nāga. |Female nāga. 
ནཻ-རཉྫ-ནཱ	 The river where the Buddha used to meditate.|The river where the Buddha used to meditate. 
གཅེར-བུ-པ	 A type of non-Buddhist religious practitioner. | Ascetic religious practitioners, usually referring to Jains.|Ascetic religious practitioners, usually referring to Jains. 
སྡེར-མོ	 Unguis odoratus, or sweet hoof (blattes de byzance): the operculus of certain sea snails (McHugh, 2008, p 180 n33).|Unguis odoratus, or sweet hoof (blattes de byzance): the operculus of certain sea snails (McHugh, 2008, p 180 n33). 
སྐར-མའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. |A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
སྐར-མའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-མེ-ཏོག-ཀུན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པ-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. Known only from this sūtra.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. Known only from this sūtra. 
ན-ལ-ད	 Śāriputra’s birthplace in Magadha. King Bimbisāra granted Śāriputra’s grandfather Māṭhara and father Tiṣya rights to this village as a victor’s spoils after debates held in his presence.|Śāriputra’s birthplace in Magadha. King Bimbisāra granted Śāriputra’s grandfather Māṭhara and father Tiṣya rights to this village as a victor’s spoils after debates held in his presence. 
གནམ-མཁའི-སྙིང-པོ	Tibetan translator (fl. late eighth–early ninth centuries).
སྣ-ནམ-ཡེ-ཤེས-སྡེ	 Chief editor of the Tibetan translation of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma and the translation program from the late eighth to early ninth century in Tibet. From the Nanam ({sna nam}) clan.|Chief editor of the Tibetan translation of The White Lotus of the Good Dharma and the translation program from the late eighth to early ninth century in Tibet. From the Nanam ({sna nam}) clan. 
དགའ-བོ	 One of eight mythological nāga kings.\nThe story of the two nāga kings Nanda and Upananda and their taming by the Buddha and Maudgalyāyana is told in the Vinayavibhaṅga (Toh 3, D vol. 6, {'dul ba}, {ja}, F.221a–224a).| One of eight mythological nāga kings.\nThe story of the two nāga kings Nanda and Upananda and their taming by the Buddha and Maudgalyāyana is told in the Vinayavibhaṅga (Toh 3, D vol. 6, {'dul ba}, {ja}, F.221a–224a). | The Buddha’s half-brother, who became one of his principal pupils. Also the name for the nāga king usually associated with Upananda. | The Buddha’s half-brother, who became one of his principal pupils.\nAlso the name for the nāga king usually associated with Upananda. | Śrāvaka arhat. |The Buddha’s half-brother, who became one of his principal pupils. Also the name for the nāga king usually associated with Upananda. 
དགའ-མོ	 One of two sisters who nursed Siddhārtha Gautama after his six years of austerities.|One of two sisters who nursed Siddhārtha Gautama after his six years of austerities. 
དགའ-སྟོབས	 One of two sisters who nursed Siddhārtha Gautama after his six years of austerities.|One of two sisters who nursed Siddhārtha Gautama after his six years of austerities. 
དགའ-བྱེད-མ	 Goddess invoked to obtain power, riches, and splendor.|Goddess invoked to obtain power, riches, and splendor. 
མི-སྦྱིན	 A famous South Indian rishi who also appears in the Ramayana and is credited with writing the first judicial text.|A famous South Indian rishi who also appears in the Ramayana and is credited with writing the first judicial text. 
མིས-བྱིན	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
སྲེད-མེད-ཀྱི-བུ	 An alternate name for Viṣṇu ({khyab 'jug}), which is also used for Brahmā and Kṛṣṇa. The Sanskrit is variously interpreted as “the path of human beings,” and “the son of man.” The Tibetan here is “the son of Nāra,” with Nāra translated as “one without craving.” | An alternate name for Viṣṇu. The Sanskrit is variously interpreted, including as “dwelling in water,” but is most obviously “the path of human beings.” | In Indian lore, incarnation of Viṣṇu, whose strength was legendary (see Abhi­dharma­kośa VII, pp. 72-74). | In the ancient Indian tradition, the son of the first man; later seen as a powerful avatar of Viṣṇu, but also as the progenitor of Brahmā. In Buddhist texts, he figures in various ways including (as he does in most of this text) as a bodhisattva, while still one of the most powerful gods of the Realm of Form (as in 1.21).| In the ancient Indian tradition, the son of the first man; later seen as a powerful avatar of Viṣṇu, but also as the progenitor of Brahmā. In Buddhist texts, he figures in various ways including (as he does in most of this text) as a bodhisattva, while still one of the most powerful gods of the Realm of Form (as in 1.21). | Literally, “Child of No Craving.” Name of Viṣṇu. | One of the ten incarnations of the Hindu deity Viṣṇu, embodying superhuman strength. |An alternate name for Viṣṇu. The Sanskrit is variously interpreted, including as “dwelling in water,” but is most obviously “the path of human beings.” 
སྲེད-མེད-བུ	 A name of Viṣṇu.|A name of Viṣṇu. 
མཐུ-བོ-ཆེ	 An alternate name for Viṣṇu. The Sanskrit is variously interpreted, including as “dwelling in water,” but is most obviously “the path of human beings.”|An alternate name for Viṣṇu. The Sanskrit is variously interpreted, including as “dwelling in water,” but is most obviously “the path of human beings.” 
ན-ལས-བྱིན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
ན-རོ-པ	 Indian scholar and practitioner (956 - 1041), a major figure in the transmission of tantric Buddhism to Tibet; earlier in his life he was an important paṇḍita of Nālandā, but left to become a yogi and siddha, the student of Tilopā, and later the teacher of Kukkuripa, Marpa, and others.\nNāropadā|Indian scholar and practitioner (956 - 1041), a major figure in the transmission of tantric Buddhism to Tibet; earlier in his life he was an important paṇḍita of Nālandā, but left to become a yogi and siddha, the student of Tilopā, and later the teacher of Kukkuripa, Marpa, and others.\nNāropadā 
རྟོགས-པར-བརྗོད-པའི-སྡེ	Ninth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.
ཉི-ཚེ-བའི-སྤྱོད-པ	This term refers to the restricted, biased, narrow-minded attitudes and practices of the disciple vehicle, which itself is called Skt. prādeśikāyāna (“limited, or narrow-minded, vehicle”) (Mvy, 1254). It is narrow-minded because it posits the reality of the elements of existence as apparently perceived and because it aspires only to personal liberation, not to the exaltation of buddhahood.
ཉི-ཚེ-བའི-ཆོས	I.e. the teachings of the disciple vehicle (śrāvakayāna). See “narrow-minded attitudes.”
ནུ-ཌི	 In the Tibetan, Śyāmā and Naṭi are confounded into one, {sh+ya ma nu Di}).|In the Tibetan, Śyāmā and Naṭi are confounded into one, {sh+ya ma nu Di}). 
བྱ-སྐྱིབས-སུ-མ-བྱས-པ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
དེ-བཞིན-ཉིད	 Literally, “thusness,” as it is indescribable.| The ultimate nature of things, or the way things are in reality, as opposed to the way they appear to non-enlightened beings. |Literally, “thusness,” as it is indescribable. 
ཆོས-རྟོགས-པའི-བཟོད-པ	 Literally, “tolerance that understands phenomena.” This denotes receptivity to the non-arising nature of all things, identified with emptiness.\ntolerance that understands phenomena| Literally, “tolerance that understands phenomena.” This denotes receptivity to the non-arising nature of all things, identified with emptiness.\ntolerance that understands phenomena |Literally, “tolerance that understands phenomena.” This denotes receptivity to the non-arising nature of all things, identified with emptiness.\ntolerance that understands phenomena 
སྐྱུག-བྲོ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ལྟེ-བ-གཡས-སུ-འཁྱིལ-བ	Twenty-eighth of the eighty minor marks.\ncurls to the right
ལྟེ-བ-མ-བྱེ-བ-དག	Fifty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.
ལྟེ-བ-ཟབ-པ	Twenty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.
ལྟེ-བ-ཤིན-ཏུ-ཟླུམ-པ	Twenty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.
གནས-ངན-ལེན	That is to say, negativity of body, speech, and mind.
ཀཱ-ཤ-མར-དྷ	Cassia occidentalis.
ནེལ-པ-པནདི-ཏ	 A 13th century Tibetan historian. Personal name: Drakpa Mönlam Lodrö ({grags pa smon lam blo gros}).| A 13th century Tibetan historian. Personal name: Drakpa Mönlam Lodrö ({grags pa smon lam blo gros}). |A 13th century Tibetan historian. Personal name: Drakpa Mönlam Lodrö ({grags pa smon lam blo gros}). 
རྡོ-རྗེ-དབྱིང-ཀྱི-དབང-ཕྱུག-མའི-རྩ	 The most sensitive spot of the woman’s genitals.|The most sensitive spot of the woman’s genitals. 
མ-ནིང	 An imprecise, catchall term, difficult to translate. It designates people with various kinds of unclear gender status, including but not restricted to physical intersex conditions and hermaphrodites. It can, for example, also mean a eunuch, or from the Vinaya account of the expulsion of a paṇḍaka , a male who sought other males to have sex with him. See also the glossary entry in http://read.84000.co/translation/toh1-1.html#UT22084-001-001-2567. It could also be applied to a transgender male, not necessarily a eunuch, such as the hijras. Hijras, men who dress as women, have been an established part of Indian society since ancient times and all-hijra communities still have a significant societal role. Hijra is a more recent term with a Hindustani-Urdu origin.| An imprecise, catchall term, difficult to translate. It designates people with various kinds of unclear gender status, including but not restricted to physical intersex conditions and hermaphrodites. It can, for example, also mean a eunuch, or from the Vinaya account of the expulsion of a paṇḍaka , a male who sought other males to have sex with him. See also the glossary entry in http://read.84000.co/translation/toh1-1.html#UT22084-001-001-2567. It could also be applied to a transgender male, not necessarily a eunuch, such as the hijras. Hijras, men who dress as women, have been an established part of Indian society since ancient times and all-hijra communities still have a significant societal role. Hijra is a more recent term with a Hindustani-Urdu origin. | In the Mūlasarvāstivāda Vinaya, the term paṇḍaka (Tib. {ma ning}) encompasses diverse physiological and behavioral conditions, such as intersexuality, erectile dysfunction, and fetishes that imply an inability to engage in normative sexual behavior. Five different types of paṇḍaka are identified in the text (see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1616): congenital hermaphrodites, sequential hermaphrodites, fetishists, voyeurs, and those who are sexually impaired (see glossary entries for each). The criteria for being designated a paṇḍaka are not strictly physiological but neither are they grounded exclusively in gender identity or sexual orientation. Paṇḍaka is, in effect, a catchall category and, as such, defies easy translations like “neuter,” “androgyne,” “intersexual,” “transgender,” or “paraphiliac.”\nSee also Gyatso (2003), Cabezón (1993), Zwilling (1992), and Likhitpreechakul (2012). |The Tibetan term {ma ning} is broader than any existing English term and refers not only to those whose sexual characteristics are not clearly defined as male or female (intersexual), but also to those who do not have any proper gender organs, those who may have both, and those who are neuter, infertile, or who simply have physical or non-physical characteristics of a {ma ning}. 
སྲོག-ཆགས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱིས-མཐོང-ཡང-བརྙས-པར-མི-བྱེད	 Sixty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nnever mistreated, though visible to all creatures|Sixty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.\nnever mistreated, though visible to all creatures 
ཙོག-པུའི-སྤོང-བ	A form of asceticism practiced especially by Ājīvikas.
རྔོག-བློ-ལྡན-ཤེས-རབ	Kadampa master (1059–1109).
གླེང-གཞི	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means the introductions to teachings.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” | The introductory sections of a sūtra. Literally it can mean “cause.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine.|The introductory sections of a sūtra. Literally it can mean “cause.” One of the nine aspects of the Dharma according to this sūtra. More commonly there are said to be twelve that include these nine. 
ཆད-པའི-ལྟ-བ	The second of two extreme views that keep one deluded with regard to reality. Nihilism is a view equally based on clinging to a truly existent self. It is the belief that once this self ends with death, everything associated with it ends. It therefore rejects rebirth and the law of karma, or cause and effect.
ནིམ-བ	Azadirachta indica.
ཀུན-ནས-མནར-སེམས-ཀྱི-དངོས-པོ-དགུ	Thinking that someone harms oneself, harms someone dear to oneself, or benefits someone dear to oneself, each in the present, past, or future.
ཀུན-ནས-མནར-གསེམས-ཀྱི-དངོས-པོ-དགུ	These consist of various mental distractions caused by the nine considerations “He has caused, causes, will cause wrong to me. He has caused, causes, will cause wrong to one dear to me. He has served, serves, will serve my enemies.”
འདུ-ཤེས-དགུ	The nine contemplations of impurity, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-180, are as follows: (1) contemplation of a bloated corpse, (2) contemplation of a worm-infested corpse, (3) contemplation of a bloody corpse, (4) contemplation of a putrefied corpse, (5) contemplation of a blue-black corpse, (6) contemplation of a devoured corpse, (7) contemplation of a dismembered corpse, (8) contemplation of a skeleton, and (9) contemplation of an immolated corpse.\nFor Pāli and Sanskrit sources relevant to the nine contemplations of impurity, see Dayal (193)2: 93–94.
གར-གྱི-ཆ-བྱད-དགུ	The nine dramatic moods, contained in the sixty-four crafts, comprise those of (1) grace (śṛṅgāra, {sgeg pa}); (2) heroism (vīra, {dpa' ba}); (3) ugliness (bībhatsa, {mi sdug pa}); (4) ferocity (raudra, {drag shul}); (5) joviality (hāsya, {bzhad gad}); (6) fearsomeness (bhayānaka, {'jigs rung}); (7) compassion (karuṇā, {snying rje}); (8) awesomeness (adbhūta, {rngam pa}); and (9) peace (śānta, {zhi ba}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315.
གཅེར-བུ-གཉེན-གྱི-བུ	 One of the six outsider teachers.| One of the six outsider teachers. |One of the six outsider teachers. 
མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདས-པ	 Final liberation from suffering. In the Hinayāna it is believed attainable by turning away from the world of living beings and transcending all afflictions and selfishnesses through meditative trances. In the Mahāyāna, it is believed attainable only by the attainment of buddhahood, the nondual realization of the indivisibility of life and liberation, and the all-powerful compassion that establishes all living beings simultaneously in their own liberations. | Sanskrit: the causes for saṃsāra are “extinguished.” Tibetan: suffering has been transcended.| Sanskrit: the causes for saṃsāra are “extinguished.” Tibetan: suffering has been transcended. | Sanskrit: “extinguishment,” for the causes for saṃsāra are “extinguished”; Tibetan: “the transcendence of suffering.” | The “blowing off” of suffering; the state of freedom from the suffering of saṃsāra. |Final liberation from suffering. In the Hinayāna it is believed attainable by turning away from the world of living beings and transcending all afflictions and selfishnesses through meditative trances. In the Mahāyāna, it is believed attainable only by the attainment of buddhahood, the nondual realization of the indivisibility of life and liberation, and the all-powerful compassion that establishes all living beings simultaneously in their own liberations. 
མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདས	 Extinction of suffering.|Extinction of suffering. 
ལྷག-མ-མེད-པའི-མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདས-པ	 One of the different types of nirvāṇa, where the aggregates have also been consumed within emptiness. See also “final nirvāṇa.”|One of the different types of nirvāṇa, where the aggregates have also been consumed within emptiness. See also “final nirvāṇa.” 
རྟག-པར-ཡོངས-སུ-མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདས-པ	 A buddha in the southern direction.|A buddha in the southern direction. 
རྟག-ཏུ-བརྩོན	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. | Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. |A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
རྟག-ཏུ-བཙོན	 Name of a bodhisattva.|Name of a bodhisattva. 
རྟག-ཏུ-ལག-བརྐྱང	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
སྡུག-བསྔལ-འཕགས-པའི-བདེན-པ	 First of the four noble truths.\ntruth of suffering\n[truth of] suffering| First of the four noble truths.\ntruth of suffering\n[truth of] suffering |First of the four noble truths.\ntruth of suffering\n[truth of] suffering 
འཕགས-པའི-བདེན-པ	 The four truths that the Buddha realized: suffering, origin, cessation, and path. They are named “truths of noble beings” since only “noble beings” with knowledge of reality can understand them.\ntruths of the noble ones| The four truths that the Buddha realized: suffering, origin, cessation, and path. They are named “truths of noble beings” since only “noble beings” with knowledge of reality can understand them.\ntruths of the noble ones |The four truths that the Buddha realized: suffering, origin, cessation, and path. They are named “truths of noble beings” since only “noble beings” with knowledge of reality can understand them.\ntruths of the noble ones 
རབ-ཏུ-བཟང-པོའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of a tathāgata.|Realm of a tathāgata. 
ལམ-འཕགས-པའི-བདེན-པ	 Fourth of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the path\n[truth of] the path|Fourth of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the path\n[truth of] the path 
ཀུན-འབྱུང-བ-འཕགས-པའི-བདེན-པ	 Second of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the origin of suffering\n[truth of] the origin of suffering| Second of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the origin of suffering\n[truth of] the origin of suffering |Second of the four noble truths.\ntruth of the origin of suffering\n[truth of] the origin of suffering 
མུ-སྟེགས-ཅན	 A follower of a non-Buddhist philosophy or religion.| A non-Buddhist religious practitioner who relies on sacred “fords” (tīrtha). | Religious or philosophical orders that were contemporary with the early Buddhist order, including Jains, Jaṭilas, Ājīvikas, and Cārvākas. Initially, the term tīrthika or tīrthya may have referred to non-Brahmanic ascetic orders.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-48 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-49. |A follower of a non-Buddhist philosophy or religion. 
རྣམ-པ-དོར-བ-མེད-པ	Name of the eighty-fifth meditative stability.
གཉིས-སུ-མེད-པ	 This is synonymous with reality, voidness, etc. But it must be remembered that nonduality does not necessarily mean unity, that unity is only one of the pair unity-duality; hence nonduality implies nonunity as well. This point is obscured by designating this nondual philosophy as “monism,” as too many modern scholars have done.|non-dual 
བདག-མེད-པའི-སྡུག-བསྔལ-གྱི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Third of the six aspects of perception.| Third of the six aspects of perception. |Third of the six aspects of perception. 
ལུང-དུ-མ-བསྟན-པའི-ཆོས	 Non-specific phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-410, include the following: non-specific physical actions, non-specific verbal actions, non-specific mental actions, the non-specific four primary elements, the non-specific five sense organs, the non-specific five psycho-physical aggregates, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, and the maturation of past actions.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).| Non-specific phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-410, include the following: non-specific physical actions, non-specific verbal actions, non-specific mental actions, the non-specific four primary elements, the non-specific five sense organs, the non-specific five psycho-physical aggregates, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, and the maturation of past actions.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). |Non-specific phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-410, include the following: non-specific physical actions, non-specific verbal actions, non-specific mental actions, the non-specific four primary elements, the non-specific five sense organs, the non-specific five psycho-physical aggregates, the twelve sense fields, the eighteen sensory elements, and the maturation of past actions.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
མི-དགེ-བའི-ཆོས	 Non-virtuous phenomena, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-409, include the following: the slaying of living creatures, theft, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, verbal abuse, irresponsible chatter, covetousness, malice, wrong views, anger, enmity, hypocrisy, annoyance, violence, jealousy, miserliness, and pride.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).| Non-virtuous phenomena, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-409, include the following: the slaying of living creatures, theft, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, verbal abuse, irresponsible chatter, covetousness, malice, wrong views, anger, enmity, hypocrisy, annoyance, violence, jealousy, miserliness, and pride.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). |Non-virtuous phenomena, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-409, include the following: the slaying of living creatures, theft, sexual misconduct, lying, slander, verbal abuse, irresponsible chatter, covetousness, malice, wrong views, anger, enmity, hypocrisy, annoyance, violence, jealousy, miserliness, and pride.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
ཤངས-མཐོ-བ	Forty-eighth of the eighty minor marks.
ཅ-ཅོ-མེད-པ	Second of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
སྡུག-པར-འདུ-ཤེས	Literally, the “notion of pleasantness;” fourth of the four misconceptions.
རྟག-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	First of the four misconceptions.
དགེ-སློང-མ-སུན-ཕྱུང-བ	 One class of person barred from joining the renunciate order.| One class of person barred from joining the renunciate order. |One class of person barred from joining the renunciate order. 
མོན-ལུག	Cyperus rotundus.
ཤིང-ཉ-གྲོ-དྷ	A tree, Ficus benghalensis, native to the Indian subcontinent, that can cover large areas by putting down aerial roots that become subsidiary trunks.
ངག-གི-སྐྱོན-རྣམ-པར-འཇིག-པས-ནམ-མཁའ-ལྟར-གྱུར-པ	 Name of the 110th meditative stability.| Name of the 110th meditative stability. |Name of the 110th meditative stability. 
ལྟུང-བྱེད	The third most severe of the five types of transgressions a monk can incur. There are 120 different types of offense, thirty entailing forfeiture and ninety simple offenses.
ལྟུང-བྱེད-འབའ-ཞིག	 One of two types of offense. There are ninety varieties of simple offense. These are are expunged through participation in the community’s purification.|One of two types of offense. There are ninety varieties of simple offense. These are are expunged through participation in the community’s purification. 
སྤང-བའི-ལྟུང-བྱེད	 A sub-type of offense of which there are thirty varieties. These are expunged through communal confession and the forfeiting of the object that caused the transgression.\noffense entailing forfeiture|A sub-type of offense of which there are thirty varieties. These are expunged through communal confession and the forfeiting of the object that caused the transgression.\noffense entailing forfeiture 
ཞོ-ཤས-འཚོ-བ	A government officer or official. Also a day-laborer.
ལས-བྱེད-པ	The monk that moves the saṅgha act on an aspirant’s petition to join the order and be ordained.
སྤོས-དཀར	Vateria indica.
སྔ-ལྟས	Prognostication, foreshadowing.
ཐམས-ཅད-མཁྱེན-པ	This refers to the gnosis of the Buddha, with which there is nothing he does not know. However, not to confuse “omniscience” with the theistic conception of an omniscient god, the “everything” here is specifically everything about the source of the predicament of worldly life and the way of transcendence of that world through liberation. Since “everything” is only an abstract term without any particular referent, once we are clear about the implications of infinity, it does not refer to any sort of ultimate totality, since a totality can only be relative, i.e., a totality within a particular frame of reference. Thus, as Dharmakīrti has remarked, “it is not a question of the Buddha’s knowing the number of fish in the ocean,” i.e., since there are infinity of fish in infinity of oceans in infinity of worlds and universes. The Buddha’s omniscience, rather, knows how to develop and liberate any fish in any ocean, as well as all other living beings.
ཐམས-ཅད-ཤེས-པ-ཉིད	 Third of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.|Third of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-ལ-དབང-བསྒྱུར-བ-ཐམས-ཅད-མཁྱེན-པ	 An epithet of the buddhas.|An epithet of the buddhas. 
ལན-ཅིག-ཕྱིར-འོང-བ	 One who has achieved the second of the four levels of attainment on the śrāvaka path, and who will have only one more rebirth before attaining liberation. | One who is destined to return to the world for only one more incarnation; one of the fruits of the Śrāvakayāna. | Second of the four stages that culminates in becoming an arhat. At this stage a being will only be reborn once again in this world. | The second level of noble ones when practicing the path of the hearers (bound to be born again no more than once). | The second level of the four kinds of noble person (āryapudgala, {'phags pa'i gang zag}), who will only be reborn once more before attaining the state of arhat.|The second level of noble ones when practicing the path of the hearers (bound to be born again no more than once). 
འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-མིན-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བསྒྲུབས-ཏེ-གནས-པ	 Seventh of the eight aspects of liberation.| Seventh of the eight aspects of liberation. |Seventh of the eight aspects of liberation. 
ཅི-ཡང-མེད-པའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བསྒྲུབས-ཏེ-གནས-པ	 Sixth of the eight aspects of liberation.|Sixth of the eight aspects of liberation. 
བསྒྲུབ-བྱ	 Person or being who is the target of a particular sādhana or ritual.| Person or being who is the target of a particular sādhana, or ritual. | This is the object of ritual accomplishment, whatever is the focus and/or the goal of ritual activity. Also translated “one to be accomplished.” |This is the object of ritual accomplishment, whatever is the focus and/or the goal of ritual activity. Also translated “target.” 
དད-པས-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	Someone who follows his or her goal out of trust in someone else.
དོན-གྱི-རྗེས-སུ-འབྲང-བ	According to the Abhi­dharma­kośa­bhāṣya, both those who “follow out of conviction” and those who “follow due to the Dharma” are actually “following the meaning/goal.” On the other hand, the JAA seems to take this as a separate subdivision.
མཛེས	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཁྱི-རྔོ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination. According to Monier-Williams, any cutaneous disease.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ས-བརྟོལ	 Bauhinia variegata, Phaneria variegata.|Bauhinia variegata, Phaneria variegata. 
བསྙེན-པར-རྫོགས-པ	The formal term for granting orders and confirming a candidate as a monk.
སོ-སོའི-སྐྱེ-བོ	Anyone who has not entered the “Path of Seeing” (i.e., has no stable direct realization of selflessness) is an ordinary person as opposed to a noble one.
བུ-གའི-སྒོ-རྣམས-ཡོངས-སུ-མ-ཉམས-པ	Fifty-fourth of the eighty minor marks.
དོ-ཥ-ཎི	 This has not been identified.|This has not been identified. 
ཨོཾ-ཥ-ཎི	 This has not been identified.|This has not been identified. 
གནོན-པོ	 An obscure Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit term. Sanskrit equivalent: avastāraka. Translated into Tibetan as “suppressor, one who presses down on someone.” Presumably from avastṛ (“to cover over, as with a blanket”).|An obscure Buddhist Hybrid Sanskrit term. Sanskrit equivalent: avastāraka. Translated into Tibetan as “suppressor, one who presses down on someone.” Presumably from avastṛ (“to cover over, as with a blanket”). 
སྟོན-པ-དྲུག	 These six teachers of nihilism, sophism, determinism, asceticism, etc. sought to rival the Buddha in his day: Purāna Kāśyapa, who negated the effects of action, good or evil; Māskārin Gośāli­putra, who taught a theory of randomness, negating causality; Saṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra, who was agnostic in refusing to maintain any opinion about anything; Kakuda Kātyāyana, who taught a materialism in which there was no such thing as killer or killed, but only transformations of elements; Ajita Keśakambala, who taught a more extreme nihilism regarding everything except the four main elements; and Nirgrantha Jñāti­putra, otherwise known as Mahāvīra, the founder of Jainism, who taught the doctrine of indeterminism (syādvāda), considering all things in terms of “maybe.” They were allowed to proclaim their doctrines unchallenged until a famous assembly at Śrāvastī, where the Buddha eclipsed them with a display of miracles and teachings.|These six teachers of nihilism, sophism, determinism, asceticism, etc. sought to rival the Buddha in his day: Purāna Kāśyapa, who negated the effects of action, good or evil; Māskārin Gośāli­putra, who taught a theory of randomness, negating causality; Saṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra, who was agnostic in refusing to maintain any opinion about anything; Kakuda Kātyāyana, who taught a materialism in which there was no such thing as killer or killed, but only transformations of elements; Ajita Keśakambala, who taught a more extreme nihilism regarding everything except the four main elements; and Nirgrantha Jñāti­putra, otherwise known as Mahāvīra, the founder of Jainism, who taught the doctrine of indeterminism (syādvāda), considering all things in terms of “maybe.” They were allowed to proclaim their doctrines unchallenged until a famous assembly at Śrāvastī, where the Buddha eclipsed them with a display of miracles and teachings. 
པདམ-ཅན	 Royal court.| Royal court. |Royal court. 
ལག-ན-པད-མོ	 A bodhisattva of the southeast.|A bodhisattva of the southeast. 
པད-མའི-འོད	 Śāriputra’s name when he becomes a buddha.|Śāriputra’s name when he becomes a buddha. 
པད-མོའི-དཔལ	 A buddha of the nadir.|A buddha of the nadir. 
པད-མའི-དཔལ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
པད-མའི-ཁྱུ-མཆོག-རྣམ-པར-གནོན-པ	 A future buddha.|A future buddha. 
པད-མ-དམ-པ	 The buddha who receives the six-syllable mantra from Avalokiteśvara.|The buddha who receives the six-syllable mantra from Avalokiteśvara. 
པད-མོ-དམ-པ	 A bodhisattva of the nadir.|A bodhisattva of the nadir. 
པད-མ-བླ-མ	 A buddha that appears in other sūtras as a contemporary of Śākyamuni in another universe. In this sūtra, King Dṛḍhabala, the bhikṣu Supuṣpacandra, and King Varapuṣpasa are said to be his previous lives.|A buddha that appears in other sūtras as a contemporary of Śākyamuni in another universe. In this sūtra, King Dṛḍhabala, the bhikṣu Supuṣpacandra, and King Varapuṣpasa are said to be his previous lives. 
པད-མོ-དམ-པའི-དཔལ	 A buddha of the southeast.|A buddha of the southeast. 
ཡན-ལག-ཏུ-ཟུག-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
པ-ཀྵུ	 Unidentified river, though there are Tibetan texts that use this name to refer to the source of the Brahmaputra.|Unidentified river, though there are Tibetan texts that use this name to refer to the source of the Brahmaputra. 
སྲང	 A unit of weight equal to 100 palas.| A unit of weight equal to 100 palas. | A unit of weight equal to 12 māṣas. | A unit of weight equal to four karṣa. | A weight that in both Indian and Tibetan systems is in the range of 30 to 50 grams. The Tibetan is often translated as an ounce.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-051-004.html#UT22084-051-004-832. | As a unit of weight, it equals four karṣa; as a unit of capacity, it equals about seven cubic inches, but this may vary from source to source. |A unit of weight equal to four karṣa. 
ཁང-བཟངས-རྣམ-པར-རྒྱལ-བྱེད	The palace or meeting-hall of the gods in the Heaven of the Thirty-three.
དཔལ-གྱི-ལྷུན-པོ	Apart from Butön’s inclusion of Palgyi Lhünpo in his list of translators, there does not appear to be much biographical information available on this ninth-century translator. In addition to his work on the vinaya, Palgyi Lhünpo translated at least two Mahāyāna sūtras (the Buddhapiṭakaduḥśīlanigraha and the Drumakiṃnararājaparipṛcchā), several chapters of dhāraṇī, and several works in verse included in the Tengyur. The colophons of his translations indicate that Paltsek revised some of his translations, including the Vinayavastu and the Bhikṣuṇī Vinayavibhaṅga, to either complete unfinished work or reflect newly adopted standards.
ཕྱག-དང-ཞབས-ཀྱི-མཐིལ-དམར-བ	Fifty-fifth of the eighty minor marks.
ཕྱག-གི-མཐིལ-མཉམ-པ	Thirty-first of the eighty minor marks.
དཔལ-བརྩེགས	Paltsek, from the village of Kawa north of Lhasa, was one of Tibet’s preeminent translators. He was one of the first seven Tibetans to be ordained by Śāntarakṣita and is counted as one of Guru Rinpoche’s twenty-five close disciples. In a famous verse by Ngok Lotsawa, Paltsek is named with Chokro Luyi Gyaltsen and Zhang Nanam Yeshé as part of a group of translators whose skills were surpassed only by Vairotsana. He translated works from a wide variety of genres, including sūtra, śāstra, vinaya, and tantra and was an author himself (for a list of his translations and writings, see Martin, 2011). Paltsek was also one of the most important editors of the early period, one of nine translators installed by Trisong Deutsen to supervise the translation of the Tripiṭaka and help catalogue translated works for the first two of three imperial catalogs (the ldan kar ma and bsam yas mchims phu ma catalogs, which were probably the initiative of Tride Songtsen; see Raine, 2010, 8).
མཁར-རྔ	 Listed among Indian instruments as an hourglass drum, played in the hand, and the ancestor of the present day huḍukka, somewhat larger than the ḍamaru. See Saṅgītaśiromaṇi: A Medieval Handbook of Indian Music, edited by Emmie Te Nijenhuis, p. 549. However, Dutt describes it as a drum made of bell metal, which matches the Tibetan translation as “bronze drum,” but he may have been influenced by the Tibetan translation of chapter 30. In an earlier chapter paṇava is simply transcribed into Tibetan. An example of a bell metal drum would be the ceṇṇala, a small flat gong of bell metal that is hit with a stick and used to keep time in South Indian music. Other instruments mentioned are of the South Indian tradition.|Listed among Indian instruments as an hourglass drum, played in the hand, and the ancestor of the present day huḍukka, somewhat larger than the ḍamaru. See Saṅgītaśiromaṇi: A Medieval Handbook of Indian Music, edited by Emmie Te Nijenhuis, p. 549. However, Dutt describes it as a drum made of bell metal, which matches the Tibetan translation as “bronze drum,” but he may have been influenced by the Tibetan translation of chapter 30. In an earlier chapter paṇava is simply transcribed into Tibetan. An example of a bell metal drum would be the ceṇṇala, a small flat gong of bell metal that is hit with a stick and used to keep time in South Indian music. Other instruments mentioned are of the South Indian tradition. 
ཟུར-ཕུད-ལྔ-པ	 A gandharva known for playing the lute.|A gandharva known for playing the lute. 
གཙུག-ཕུ-ལྔ-པ	 A gandharva who was very prominent in early Buddhism and is featured on early stupa reliefs playing a lute and singing. He would come to Buddha Śākyamuni, who was not portrayed as omniscient, to inform him of what was occuring in the paradises. He also accompanies Indra on a visit to the Buddha and plays music to bring the Buddha out of his meditation. He performs the same role in the Mahāyāna sūtra The White Lotus of Compassion. He was portrayed as living on a five-peaked mountain, and appears to be the basis for Mañjuśrī, first known as Mañjughoṣa (Beautiful Voice) with Pañcaśikha still being one of Mañjuśrī’s alternate names. In this sūtra he is clearly distinct from Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī.|A gandharva who was very prominent in early Buddhism and is featured on early stupa reliefs playing a lute and singing. He would come to Buddha Śākyamuni, who was not portrayed as omniscient, to inform him of what was occuring in the paradises. He also accompanies Indra on a visit to the Buddha and plays music to bring the Buddha out of his meditation. He performs the same role in the Mahāyāna sūtra The White Lotus of Compassion. He was portrayed as living on a five-peaked mountain, and appears to be the basis for Mañjuśrī, first known as Mañjughoṣa (Beautiful Voice) with Pañcaśikha still being one of Mañjuśrī’s alternate names. In this sūtra he is clearly distinct from Bodhisattva Mañjuśrī. 
ལྔས-རྩེན	 A yakṣa. | Traditionally the head of the yakṣa army serving Vaiśravaṇa, and the consort of Hariti.|A yakṣa. 
པན-ད-པ	 Five brothers who were the sons of Paṇḍu. The most famous was Arjuna (of Bhagavadgīta fame); the other four were Yudhiṣṭhira, Nakula, Sahadeva, and Bhīmasena. The story of the Pāṇḍava brothers and their battle with their cousins, the Kauravas, is the subject of the Mahābhārata, India’s greatest epic. In the sūtra, Bali imprisons the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas together.|Five brothers who were the sons of Paṇḍu. The most famous was Arjuna (of Bhagavadgīta fame); the other four were Yudhiṣṭhira, Nakula, Sahadeva, and Bhīmasena. The story of the Pāṇḍava brothers and their battle with their cousins, the Kauravas, is the subject of the Mahābhārata, India’s greatest epic. In the sūtra, Bali imprisons the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas together. 
མཁས-པ	 An official title for a learned scholar in India.|An official title for a learned scholar in India. 
ཀཱ-ཀ-ཇི-གྷ	Dicliptera paniculata .
སྡིག-ཅན	 Demonic being (his name means “the wicked one”) who resides in the the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations.|Demonic being (his name means “the wicked one”) who resides in the the Heaven of Making Use of Others’ Emanations. 
པར-ཤ	 One of the vedic sages who revealed some of the Vedas, and is believed to have written the first puraṇa.|One of the vedic sages who revealed some of the Vedas, and is believed to have written the first puraṇa. 
མྱ-ངན-ལས-འདའ	 “Complete nirvāṇa.” It can specifically refer to entering nirvāṇa at death.|“Complete nirvāṇa.” It can specifically refer to entering nirvāṇa at death. 
པ-རི-པེ-ལ	 Cyperus rotundus.|Cyperus rotundus. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-རྒྱུ	 Wandering religious practitioners or śramaṇa, usually referring to non-Buddhists.|A non-Buddhist religious practitioner who “roams around.” 
འོད-ཆུང	 Fourth god realm of form, meaning “little radiance.”| Fourth god realm of form, meaning “little radiance.” | The second of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. |The second of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. 
དགེ-བ	 The lowest of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm.|The lowest of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. 
ལྷ-མོ-པརྞ-ཤ-བ-རི	 A female deity in a variant of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa.|A female deity in a variant of the maṇḍala of Caṇḍa­mahā­roṣaṇa. 
ཤང-ཤང-ཏེའུ	 Also translated "partridge."| Chukar partridge (Alectoris chukar, also known as the Greek partridge). In later times in China and Tibet this became a legendary half-human bird, or a two-headed bird. | In particular the Chukar partridge (Alectoris chukar) also known as the Greek partridge. The name comes from its call of rapidly repeated three notes. In later times, in China and Tibet this became a legendary half-human bird, or a two-headed bird. |Also translated "pheasant." 
འདོད-ཆགས-རྡོ-རྗེ-མ	 Consort of Red Acala.|Consort of Red Acala. 
སྐྱེས-རབས-ཀྱི-སྡེ	 Eighth of the twelve branches of the scriptures.|Eighth of the twelve branches of the scriptures. 
སྣམ-ཕྲན	Monks’ robes are to be sewn into large sections from small patches of cloth rather than bolts of cloth.
སྦྱོར-ལམ	Second of the five paths.
ཕ-བསད-པ	One of the classes of people barred from joining the renunciate order.
ཡོན	The patronage a pure monk is entitled to receive, without the attendant karmic burden, due to his pure ethics and observance of vows.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1841.
སྣམ-བུ	 Curtains of pearl necklaces suspended from the walls of the inner rectangle of the maṇḍala.|Curtains of pearl necklaces suspended from the walls of the inner rectangle of the maṇḍala. 
འདབ-སྤེན	 Golden-fronted leafbird.|Golden-fronted leafbird. 
རྩོད-པ-ཅན	Someone who has put himself up as surety or sold himself as a slave.
རྩེ-མོ	Second of the four aspects of the path of preparation.
རྒོད-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོ	 A mountain by Rajghir in Bihar, which is the setting for many sutras.\nGṛdhrakūṭa | Name of a mountain by Rajghir in Bihar, which is the setting for many sutras.| Name of a mountain by Rajghir in Bihar, which is the setting for many sutras. |A mountain by Rajghir in Bihar, which is the setting for many sutras.\nGṛdhrakūṭa 
བྱ-རྒོད-ཕུང-པོའི-རི	 A mountain situated in the vicinity of Rājagṛha where the Prajnāpāramitā sūtras were taught and which continues to be a sacred pilgrimage site for Buddhists to this day. | Name of a mountain close to Rājgṛha. It is famous as the place where the Buddha is said to have taught the Prajñāpāramitā and other teachings.| Name of a mountain close to Rājgṛha. It is famous as the place where the Buddha is said to have taught the Prajñāpāramitā and other teachings. | Name of a mountain in Rājgir. | The mountain where many Great Vehicle teachings were delivered by Buddha Śākyamuni. |Name of a mountain in Rājgir. 
བྱ-རྒོད-ཀྱི-ཕུང-པོའི-རི	 Name of a hill near Rāja­gṛha.|Name of a hill near Rāja­gṛha. 
བྱ-རྒོད-ཕུང-པོ	 Vulture Peak| Vulture Peak |Vulture Peak 
བསླབ-པ-སྦྱིན-པ	A monk who has incurred a defeat but is given the opportunity to engage in rehabilitative training.
འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-མིན-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Fourth of the four formless absorptions.|Fourth of the four formless absorptions. 
དཀའ-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 notion of hardship|notion of hardship 
འཆི-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Fifth of the six aspects of perception.|Fifth of the six aspects of perception. 
འདུ-ཤེས-དྲུག	 The six aspects of perception, as enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-184, are: (1) perception of impermanence, (2) perception of suffering, (3) perception of non-self, (4) perception of unattractiveness, (5) perception of death, and (6) perception of disinterest in all mundane things.|The six aspects of perception, as enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-184, are: (1) perception of impermanence, (2) perception of suffering, (3) perception of non-self, (4) perception of unattractiveness, (5) perception of death, and (6) perception of disinterest in all mundane things. 
སྡུག-བསྔལ-བའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Second of the six aspects of perception.| Second of the six aspects of perception. |Second of the six aspects of perception. 
མི-སྡུག-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས	 Fourth of the six aspects of perception.|Fourth of the six aspects of perception. 
འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-མིན-གྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Fourth of the four formless absorptions.| Fourth of the four formless absorptions. |Fourth of the four formless absorptions. 
ནང-གཟུགས-མེད-པར-འདུ-ཤེས-པས-ཕྱི-རོལ-གྱི-གཟུགས-རྣམས-ལ-ལྟ-བ	 Second of the eight aspects of liberation.|Second of the eight aspects of liberation. 
ཐ-དད-པའི-འདུ-ཤེས-མེད-པ	 Fourth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.|Fourth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
ལེགས-པའི-བློ	The ninth bodhisattva bhūmi.
གསུང-སྙན-ཅིང-རྣམ-པ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཡོངས-སུ-རྫོགས-པ	 Forty-sixth of the eighty minor marks.| Forty-sixth of the eighty minor marks. |Forty-sixth of the eighty minor marks. 
ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 A set of practices to be completely mastered (until one reaches their “other shore”) for those on the bodhisattva path. They are listed as either six or ten. | Also translated as “transcendences.” The term is used to define the actions of a bodhisattva. The six perfections are: generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration and wisdom. | See “six transcendent perfections.”| See “six transcendent perfections.” |To have transcended or crossed to the other side; typically refers to the practices of the bodhisattvas, which are embraced with knowledge. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-མ	 Female deity. | The perfection of wisdom personified.| The perfection of wisdom personified. |The perfection of wisdom personified. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 Sixth of the six transcendent perfections.| Sixth of the six transcendent perfections. | The sixth of the six perfections. | Transcendental wisdom, being the profound nondual understanding of the ultimate reality, or voidness, or relativity, of all things; personified as a goddess, she is worshiped as the “Mother of all Buddhas” (Sarva­jina­mātā). |The sixth of the six perfections. 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 Fourth of the six transcendent perfections.| Fourth of the six transcendent perfections. |Fourth of the six transcendent perfections. 
བཟོད-པའི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 Third of the six transcendent perfections.| Third of the six transcendent perfections. |Third of the six transcendent perfections. 
ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ-དྲུག	 A bodhisattva’s practices of giving, ethical discipline, forbearance, perseverence, meditative concentration, and wisdom. To qualify as perfections, those practices must be motivated by bodhicitta−the mind of enlightenment—and embraced with an understanding of emptiness. | The practice of the six transcendent perfections, comprising generosity, ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom or discriminative awareness, is the foundation of the entire bodhisattva's way of life. These six are known as “transcendent perfections” when they are motivated by an altruistic intention to attain full enlightenment for the sake of all beings, when they are undertaken within a sixfold combination of all the perfections, and when they are performed with an awareness of the emptiness of the agent, the object, and their interaction. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-264.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-265).| The practice of the six transcendent perfections, comprising generosity, ethical discipline, tolerance, perseverance, meditative concentration, and wisdom or discriminative awareness, is the foundation of the entire bodhisattva's way of life. These six are known as “transcendent perfections” when they are motivated by an altruistic intention to attain full enlightenment for the sake of all beings, when they are undertaken within a sixfold combination of all the perfections, and when they are performed with an awareness of the emptiness of the agent, the object, and their interaction. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-264.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-265). | The six are generosity, morality, patience, diligence, concentration, and wisdom. | The trainings of the bodhisattva path: generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and knowledge. |The trainings of the bodhisattva path: generosity, discipline, patience, diligence, concentration, and knowledge. 
པྲི-ཡང-ཀུ	 Callicarpa macrophylla. | “A particularly tricky word – perhaps Agalia odorate?” (McHugh, 2008, p 180, n26). May also be Callicarpa macrophylla.| “A particularly tricky word – perhaps Agalia odorate?” (McHugh, 2008, p 180, n26). May also be Callicarpa macrophylla. |Callicarpa macrophylla. 
རྟག-པ	permanence
ནམ-མཁའ-ཁྱབ-པར-བྱེད-པ	 Name of the twenty-second meditative stability.|Name of the twenty-second meditative stability. 
སོ-སོར-བཤགས-པར-བྱ-བ	The least severe of five types of transgressions a monk can incur. There are four types of offense requiring personal confession, which are expunged through personal confession.
གདེངས-ཀ-ཅན	 A leading nāga.|A leading nāga. 
དགེ-བའི-ཆོས	 Also translated here as “virtuous attributes.” For a listing of the mundane virtuous phenomena, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-407.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).| Also translated here as “virtuous phenomena.” |Also translated here as “virtuous attributes.” For a listing of the mundane virtuous phenomena, see http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-407.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
འཇིག-རྟེན-ལས-འདས-པའི-ཆོས	 Supramundane phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-411, include the following: the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous abilities, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, the three gateways to liberation, the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown, the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things, the faculties endowed with the knowledge of all things, the meditative stability endowed with ideation and scrutiny, the meditative stability free from ideation and merely endowed with scrutiny, the meditative stability free from both ideation and scrutiny, the [eighteen] aspects of emptiness (starting from the emptiness of internal phenomena and ending with the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities), the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-412).| Supramundane phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-411, include the following: the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous abilities, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, the three gateways to liberation, the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown, the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things, the faculties endowed with the knowledge of all things, the meditative stability endowed with ideation and scrutiny, the meditative stability free from ideation and merely endowed with scrutiny, the meditative stability free from both ideation and scrutiny, the [eighteen] aspects of emptiness (starting from the emptiness of internal phenomena and ending with the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities), the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-412). |Supramundane phenomena, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-411, include the following: the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct exertions, the four supports for miraculous abilities, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven branches of enlightenment, the noble eightfold path, the three gateways to liberation, the faculties that will enable knowledge of all that is unknown, the faculties that acquire the knowledge of all things, the faculties endowed with the knowledge of all things, the meditative stability endowed with ideation and scrutiny, the meditative stability free from ideation and merely endowed with scrutiny, the meditative stability free from both ideation and scrutiny, the [eighteen] aspects of emptiness (starting from the emptiness of internal phenomena and ending with the emptiness of the essential nature of non-entities), the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, great loving kindness, great compassion, and the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-412). 
ཐུན-མོང-མ-ལགས-པའི-ཆོས	 Uncommon phenomena from the perspective of ordinary persons, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-418, include the following: the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, the three gateways to liberation, and [all the aforementioned attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).|Uncommon phenomena from the perspective of ordinary persons, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-418, include the following: the thirty-seven aspects of enlightenment, the ten powers of the tathāgatas, the four assurances, the four unhindered discernments, the three gateways to liberation, and [all the aforementioned attributes], up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
འདུས-མ-བྱས-པའི-ཆོས	 Unconditioned phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-416, include the following: Non-arising, non-abiding, non-disintegration, and non-transformation with respect to all things, and similarly, the cessation of desire, the cessation of hatred, the cessation of delusion, the abiding of phenomena in the real nature, reality, the expanse of reality, maturity with respect to all things, the real nature, the unmistaken real nature, the inalienable real nature, and the finality of existence.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).| Unconditioned phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-416, include the following: Non-arising, non-abiding, non-disintegration, and non-transformation with respect to all things, and similarly, the cessation of desire, the cessation of hatred, the cessation of delusion, the abiding of phenomena in the real nature, reality, the expanse of reality, maturity with respect to all things, the real nature, the unmistaken real nature, the inalienable real nature, and the finality of existence.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). |Unconditioned phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-416, include the following: Non-arising, non-abiding, non-disintegration, and non-transformation with respect to all things, and similarly, the cessation of desire, the cessation of hatred, the cessation of delusion, the abiding of phenomena in the real nature, reality, the expanse of reality, maturity with respect to all things, the real nature, the unmistaken real nature, the inalienable real nature, and the finality of existence.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
ཟག-པ-མ-མཆིས-པའི-ཆོས	 Uncontaminated phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-414, include the following: the four applications of mindfulness, and likewise all those [aforementioned causal and fruitional] attributes, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408).| Uncontaminated phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-414, include the following: the four applications of mindfulness, and likewise all those [aforementioned causal and fruitional] attributes, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). |Uncontaminated phenomena, as described in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-414, include the following: the four applications of mindfulness, and likewise all those [aforementioned causal and fruitional] attributes, up to and including the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-408). 
ཆོས-ཀྱིས-གནས-པའི-སྤྱི-གཙུག	 Name of the fifty-ninth meditative stability.|Name of the fifty-ninth meditative stability. 
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-ལས-ཤིན-ཏུ-འཕགས-པ	 Name of the sixth meditative stability.|Name of the sixth meditative stability. 
རྣམ-མཁྱེན	 First of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.|First of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
རྣམ-པར-མཁྱེན-པ	 First of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.|First of the eight progressive sections of clear realization. 
ཆོས-ཀྱི-དབྱིངས-ཀྱི-ཡེ-ཤེས	 One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata in the centre of the maṇḍala (in the CMT it is the buddha Akṣobhya).| One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata in the centre of the maṇḍala (in the CMT it is the buddha Akṣobhya). |One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata in the centre of the maṇḍala (in the CMT it is the buddha Akṣobhya). 
ཆོས-ལ-འཇུག-པའི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 Name of the eleventh meditative stability.| Name of the eleventh meditative stability. |Name of the eleventh meditative stability. 
སྲིད-པ	 Tenth of the twelve links of dependent origination; third of the four torrents. Also translated here as “phenomenal existence.”\nrebirth\nrebirth process| Tenth of the twelve links of dependent origination; third of the four torrents. Also translated here as “phenomenal existence.”\nrebirth\nrebirth process |Also translated here as “rebirth” and “rebirth process” 
བད-ཀན-ལས-གྱུར-པའི-ནད	Third of the four kinds of disease.
པི-ལིན-དའི-བུ	 An arhat particularly remembered for being able to command the goddess of the Ganges River to make it stop flowing. She was annoyed by the brusque way he commanded her, but the Buddha said she was his servant for centuries in previous lifetimes and he addressed her that way out of habit, which is explained to be why his name means “leftover habits.”|An arhat particularly remembered for being able to command the goddess of the Ganges River to make it stop flowing. She was annoyed by the brusque way he commanded her, but the Buddha said she was his servant for centuries in previous lifetimes and he addressed her that way out of habit, which is explained to be why his name means “leftover habits.” 
མཆོད-སྡོང	 A post set up as a marker to which offerings may be presented. Described in the Maitreyāvadāna (“The Story of Maitreya”), which in the Kangyur is found within the Bhaiṣajya­vastu (in Vinayavastu, Toh 1, Degé Kangyur, vol. kha, folios 29a-32b); a matching passage from the Divyāvadāna is translated in Rotman, 2008, pp 121-124.|“Pillar” is a rather loose rendering for this term, which refers more specifically to ceremonial or memorial columns, or to the sacrificial posts used in Vedic rituals (cf. Monier-Williams).\npillars 
ཤ-ཟ	 A class of spirits. | A flesh-eating demon, or a demon who can possess the body of a human and cause various illnesses or insanity. They are often depicted as red-eyed, dark-skinned, bulging-eyed creatures, although they seem to be able to assume many shapes. | A spirit that haunts the night, feeds on corpses, and is fatal to see. | A spirit that haunts the night, feeds on corpses, and is fatal to see. The Tibetan means “flesh eater.” The Sanskrit does not have “eat” as part of the name, but piśa means “flesh.” An alternative etymology is that they are called piśāca because they are yellow in color, from the Sanskrit piśita, meaning “yellow.” | A type of malevolent ghost, considered to belong to the preta realm. Tibetan translates the term as “flesh-eaters.”| A type of malevolent ghost, considered to belong to the preta realm. Tibetan translates the term as “flesh-eaters.” | Class of demons; literally “flesh eater.” |A flesh-eating demon, or a demon who can possess the body of a human and cause various illnesses or insanity. They are often depicted as red-eyed, dark-skinned, bulging-eyed creatures, although they seem to be able to assume many shapes. 
ཕོལ-མིག	 Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.|Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011. 
སྡེ-སྣོད	 A collection of canonical texts according to subject, the piṭakas are usually Vinaya, Sūtra, and Abhidharma. It can also refer, as in this sūtra, to the collection of the Mahāyana teachings, which is known as the bodhisattva-piṭaka. The word originates from the term “baskets,” originally used to contain these collections.|A collection of canonical texts according to subject, the piṭakas are usually Vinaya, Sūtra, and Abhidharma. It can also refer, as in this sūtra, to the collection of the Mahāyana teachings, which is known as the bodhisattva-piṭaka. The word originates from the term “baskets,” originally used to contain these collections. 
སྙན-པར-སྨྲ-བ	 Second of the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva.|Second of the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva. 
རྙེད-བཙོན	Someone put up as a pledge or surety by another person.
མང-པོ-བརྗོད-པ	See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1140.
འཇམ-འབྲས	Pongamia pinnata.
སྤུའི-ཁུང-བུ-ཐམས-ཅད-ནས-དྲི-ཡིད-དུ-འོང-བ-འབྱུང-བ	Fortieth of the eighty minor marks.\npores of their bodies all emit a pleasant odor
བསམ-པ	 In general, a joyous attitude to help living beings and accomplish virtue. This is also the first stirring in the bodhisattva’s mind of the inspiration to attain enlightenment (see “high resolve”). See Lamotte, Appendice, Note II.|In general, a joyous attitude to help living beings and accomplish virtue. This is also the first stirring in the bodhisattva’s mind of the inspiration to attain enlightenment (see “high resolve”). See Lamotte, Appendice, Note II. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-སྤྱན	The thirteenth bodhisattva level.
སྤྱོད-ལམ	Sitting, standing, lying down, walking.
གྲུ-འཛིན	 Maudgalyāyana’s father, who was a wealthy royal priest.|Maudgalyāyana’s father, who was a wealthy royal priest. 
རྫུ-འཕྲུལ	 The supernatural powers of a śrāvaka correspond to the first abhijnā: “Being one he becomes many, being many he becomes one; he becomes visible, invisible; goes through walls, ramparts and mountains without being impeded, just as through air; he immerses himself in the earth and emerges from it as if in water; he goes on water without breaking through it, as if on [solid] earth; he travels through the air crosslegged like a winged bird; he takes in his hands and touches the moon and the sun, those two wonderful, mighty beings, and with his body he extends his power as far as the Brahma world” (Lamotte 2003: 20). The great supernatural powers (mahāṛddhi) of bodhisattvas are: “causing trembling, blazing, illuminating, rendering invisible, transforming, coming and going across obstacles, reducing or enlarging worlds, inserting any matter into one’s own body, assuming the aspects of those one frequents, appearing and disappearing, submitting everyone to one’s will, dominating the supernormal power of others, giving intellectual clarity to those who lack it, giving mindfulness, bestowing happiness, and finally, emitting beneficial rays.” (Lamotte 2003: 30).|The supernatural powers of a śrāvaka correspond to the first abhijnā: “Being one he becomes many, being many he becomes one; he becomes visible, invisible; goes through walls, ramparts and mountains without being impeded, just as through air; he immerses himself in the earth and emerges from it as if in water; he goes on water without breaking through it, as if on [solid] earth; he travels through the air crosslegged like a winged bird; he takes in his hands and touches the moon and the sun, those two wonderful, mighty beings, and with his body he extends his power as far as the Brahma world” (Lamotte 2003: 20). The great supernatural powers (mahāṛddhi) of bodhisattvas are: “causing trembling, blazing, illuminating, rendering invisible, transforming, coming and going across obstacles, reducing or enlarging worlds, inserting any matter into one’s own body, assuming the aspects of those one frequents, appearing and disappearing, submitting everyone to one’s will, dominating the supernormal power of others, giving intellectual clarity to those who lack it, giving mindfulness, bestowing happiness, and finally, emitting beneficial rays.” (Lamotte 2003: 30). 
དད-པའི-སྟོབས	 First of the five powers.|First of the five powers. 
དྲན-པའི-སྟོབས	 Third of the five powers.| Third of the five powers. |Third of the five powers. 
བརྩོན-འགྲུས-ཀྱི-སྟོབས	 Both the name of the fourteenth meditative stability and the second of the five powers.|Both the name of the fourteenth meditative stability and the second of the five powers. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-སྟོབས	 Fifth of the five powers.| Fifth of the five powers. |Fifth of the five powers. 
དབང	The five powers: faith, mindfulness, diligence, samādhi, and wisdom.
དབང-བཅུ	 Powers attained by bodhisattvas on the path: power over life, karma, materials, devotion, aspiration, miracles, birth, Dharma, mind, and wisdom. Not to be confused with the ten strengths (bala, {stobs}) which are qualities of buddhahood.| Powers attained by bodhisattvas on the path: power over life, karma, materials, devotion, aspiration, miracles, birth, Dharma, mind, and wisdom. Not to be confused with the ten strengths (bala, {stobs}) which are qualities of buddhahood. | The ten powers gained by bodhisattvas as they progress on the path: life, deeds, necessities, devotion, aspiration, miraculous abilities, birth, doctrine, mind, and wisdom. |The ten powers gained by bodhisattvas as they progress on the path: life, deeds, necessities, devotion, aspiration, miraculous abilities, birth, doctrine, mind, and wisdom. 
སྟོབས-བཅུ	 For the five strengths, see “powers.” The ten strengths can refer either to one set of ten qualities of tathāgatas, or to a different list of ten strengths of bodhisattvas. | One set among the different qualities of a tathāgata. The ten strengths are (1) the knowledge of what is possible and not possible; (2) the knowledge of the ripening of karma; (3) the knowledge of the variety of aspirations; (4) the knowledge of the variety of natures; (5) the knowledge of the different levels of capabilites; (6) the knowledge of the destinations of all paths; (7) the knowledge of various states of meditation (dhyāna, liberation, samādhi, samāpatti, and so on); (8) the knowledge of remembering previous lives; (9) the knowledge of deaths and rebirths; and (10) the knowledge of the cessation of defilements.| One set among the different qualities of a tathāgata. The ten strengths are (1) the knowledge of what is possible and not possible; (2) the knowledge of the ripening of karma; (3) the knowledge of the variety of aspirations; (4) the knowledge of the variety of natures; (5) the knowledge of the different levels of capabilites; (6) the knowledge of the destinations of all paths; (7) the knowledge of various states of meditation (dhyāna, liberation, samādhi, samāpatti, and so on); (8) the knowledge of remembering previous lives; (9) the knowledge of deaths and rebirths; and (10) the knowledge of the cessation of defilements. | There are two different sets of ten powers, those of the Buddha and those of bodhisattvas. Those of the Buddha consist of power from knowing right from wrong (sthānāsthāna­jñāna­bala); power from knowing the consequences of actions (karma­vipāka­jñāna-); power from knowing the various inclinations (of living beings) (nānādhimukti­jñāna-); power from knowing the various types (of living beings) (nānādhātujñāna-); power from knowing the degree of the capacities (of living beings) (indriya­varāvara­jñāna-); power from knowing the path that leads everywhere (sarva­tragāmīmpratipat­jñāna-); power from knowing the obscuration, affliction, and purification of all contemplations, meditations, liberations, concentrations, and absorptions (sarva­dhyāna­vimokṣa­samādhi­samāpatti­saṃkleśa­vyavadāna­vyutthāna­jñāna-); power from knowing his own former lives (pūrva­nivāsānu­smṛti­jñāna-); power from knowing deaths and future lives (cyutyutpatti­jñāna-); and power from knowing the exhaustion of defilements (āsravakṣaya­jñāna-). The latter set consists of the bodhisattva’s power of positive thought (āśayabala); power of high resolve (adhyāśaya-); power of application (prayoga-); power of wisdom (prajña-); power of prayer (praṇidhāna-); power of vehicle (yāna-); power of activities (caryā-); power of emanations (vikurvaṇa-); power of enlightenment (bodhi-); and power of turning the wheel of the Dharma (dharma­cakra­pravartaṇa-). |There are two different sets of ten powers, those of the Buddha and those of bodhisattvas. Those of the Buddha consist of power from knowing right from wrong (sthānāsthāna­jñāna­bala); power from knowing the consequences of actions (karma­vipāka­jñāna-); power from knowing the various inclinations (of living beings) (nānādhimukti­jñāna-); power from knowing the various types (of living beings) (nānādhātujñāna-); power from knowing the degree of the capacities (of living beings) (indriya­varāvara­jñāna-); power from knowing the path that leads everywhere (sarva­tragāmīmpratipat­jñāna-); power from knowing the obscuration, affliction, and purification of all contemplations, meditations, liberations, concentrations, and absorptions (sarva­dhyāna­vimokṣa­samādhi­samāpatti­saṃkleśa­vyavadāna­vyutthāna­jñāna-); power from knowing his own former lives (pūrva­nivāsānu­smṛti­jñāna-); power from knowing deaths and future lives (cyutyutpatti­jñāna-); and power from knowing the exhaustion of defilements (āsravakṣaya­jñāna-). The latter set consists of the bodhisattva’s power of positive thought (āśayabala); power of high resolve (adhyāśaya-); power of application (prayoga-); power of wisdom (prajña-); power of prayer (praṇidhāna-); power of vehicle (yāna-); power of activities (caryā-); power of emanations (vikurvaṇa-); power of enlightenment (bodhi-); and power of turning the wheel of the Dharma (dharma­cakra­pravartaṇa-). 
མངོན-ཤེས-དྲུག	 As mentioned in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-266, they comprise (1) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of [miraculous] activities, (2) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairvoyance, (3) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairaudience, (4) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of other minds, (5) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives, and (6) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of the cessation of contaminants. .\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-267).|As mentioned in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-266, they comprise (1) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of [miraculous] activities, (2) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairvoyance, (3) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of divine clairaudience, (4) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of other minds, (5) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of recollection of past lives, and (6) the extrasensory power realizing knowledge of the cessation of contaminants. .\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-267). 
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པའི-སྟོབས-བཅུ	 The ten powers of the tathāgatas, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-245, are: (1) definitive knowledge that things which are possible are indeed possible; (2) definitive knowledge that things which are impossible are indeed impossible; (3) definitive knowledge, through possibilities and causes, of the maturation of past, future, and present actions, and of those who undertake such actions; (4) definitive knowledge of multiple world systems and diverse dispositions; (5) definitive knowledge of the diversity of inclinations and the multiplicity of inclinations that other sentient beings and other individuals have; (6) definitive knowledge of whether the acumen of other sentient beings and other individuals is supreme or not; (7) definitive knowledge of the paths that lead anywhere; (8) definitive knowledge of all the afflicted and purified mental states and their emergence, with respect to the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, aspects of liberation, meditative concentrations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions; (9) definitive knowledge of the recollection of multiple past abodes, and of the transference of consciousness at the death and birth of all sentient beings; and (10) definitive knowledge that through one’s own extrasensory powers one has actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased.\nten powers of a tathāgata| The ten powers of the tathāgatas, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-245, are: (1) definitive knowledge that things which are possible are indeed possible; (2) definitive knowledge that things which are impossible are indeed impossible; (3) definitive knowledge, through possibilities and causes, of the maturation of past, future, and present actions, and of those who undertake such actions; (4) definitive knowledge of multiple world systems and diverse dispositions; (5) definitive knowledge of the diversity of inclinations and the multiplicity of inclinations that other sentient beings and other individuals have; (6) definitive knowledge of whether the acumen of other sentient beings and other individuals is supreme or not; (7) definitive knowledge of the paths that lead anywhere; (8) definitive knowledge of all the afflicted and purified mental states and their emergence, with respect to the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, aspects of liberation, meditative concentrations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions; (9) definitive knowledge of the recollection of multiple past abodes, and of the transference of consciousness at the death and birth of all sentient beings; and (10) definitive knowledge that through one’s own extrasensory powers one has actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased.\nten powers of a tathāgata |The ten powers of the tathāgatas, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-245, are: (1) definitive knowledge that things which are possible are indeed possible; (2) definitive knowledge that things which are impossible are indeed impossible; (3) definitive knowledge, through possibilities and causes, of the maturation of past, future, and present actions, and of those who undertake such actions; (4) definitive knowledge of multiple world systems and diverse dispositions; (5) definitive knowledge of the diversity of inclinations and the multiplicity of inclinations that other sentient beings and other individuals have; (6) definitive knowledge of whether the acumen of other sentient beings and other individuals is supreme or not; (7) definitive knowledge of the paths that lead anywhere; (8) definitive knowledge of all the afflicted and purified mental states and their emergence, with respect to the faculties, powers, branches of enlightenment, aspects of liberation, meditative concentrations, meditative stabilities, and formless absorptions; (9) definitive knowledge of the recollection of multiple past abodes, and of the transference of consciousness at the death and birth of all sentient beings; and (10) definitive knowledge that through one’s own extrasensory powers one has actualized, achieved, and maintained in this very lifetime the liberation of mind and the liberation of wisdom in the state that is free from contaminants because all contaminants have ceased.\nten powers of a tathāgata 
འོད-ཀྱི-བྱུང-གནས	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
རབ-ཏུ-སྣང	 See “Samanta­prabhāsa.”|See “Samanta­prabhāsa.” 
འོད-བཀོད-པ	 A bodhisattva present in the opening assembly, who later tells the story of his encounter with Vimalakīrti, who discourses to him about the seat of enlightenment.|A bodhisattva present in the opening assembly, who later tells the story of his encounter with Vimalakīrti, who discourses to him about the seat of enlightenment. 
རིན-ཆེན-མང	 One of the buddhas who assembled at Vimalakīrti’s house to teach esoteric practices, according to the goddess (Chap. 7).|One of the buddhas who assembled at Vimalakīrti’s house to teach esoteric practices, according to the goddess (Chap. 7). 
རིན-ཆེན-མང-པོ	 “Many Jewels.” The buddha who had lived in a realm in the east (though the sūtra also states that it is in a downward direction) whose stūpa appears while Buddha Śākyamuni is teaching the Lotus Sūtra.\nIt is also the name as given in the verses for the eon in which Śāriputra will attain buddhahood. The name is different in the prose section.|“Many Jewels.” The buddha who had lived in a realm in the east (though the sūtra also states that it is in a downward direction) whose stūpa appears while Buddha Śākyamuni is teaching the Lotus Sūtra.\nIt is also the name as given in the verses for the eon in which Śāriputra will attain buddhahood. The name is different in the prose section. 
རབ-ཏུ-སྦྱིན-དཔའ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
རབ-སྣང	 Son of King Anantanemi of Ujjayinī.|Son of King Anantanemi of Ujjayinī. 
སྐྱེ-དགུའི-བདག-པོ	 Name of a god (deva).|Name of a god (deva). 
ཤེས-རབ-མ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī. 
ཤེས-རབ-འབྱུང-གནས-བློ-གྲོས	 (950−1030) One of the main masters in Vikramaśila monastery.|(950−1030) One of the main masters in Vikramaśila monastery. 
ཤེས-རབ-བརྩེགས	 A bodhisattva from the realm of Buddha Prabhūtaratna.|A bodhisattva from the realm of Buddha Prabhūtaratna. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པ	 The Kāraṇḍavyūha is referring to the goddess who is the personification of the perfection of wisdom, and is in the feminine case. However, the Tibetan has the male ending -{pa}, instead of the female ending -{ma}, which is presently normally used for the goddess, but does not appear in the Mahāvyutpatti Sanskrit-Tibetan concordance.|The Kāraṇḍavyūha is referring to the goddess who is the personification of the perfection of wisdom, and is in the feminine case. However, the Tibetan has the male ending -{pa}, instead of the female ending -{ma}, which is presently normally used for the goddess, but does not appear in the Mahāvyutpatti Sanskrit-Tibetan concordance. 
ཤེས-རབ-གོ-ཆ	 Indian paṇḍita (fl. ninth century).|Indian paṇḍita (fl. ninth century). 
པྲ-ཛཉའ-བརྨ	 Indian paṇḍit who translated and edited (among others) the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations.|Indian paṇḍit who translated and edited (among others) the sūtra Purification of Karmic Obscurations. 
ཤེས-རབ-ཀྱི-ཕ-རོལ-ཏུ-ཕྱིན-པའི-མདོ	 The sūtra in which the transcendental wisdom is taught. There are nineteen versions of different lengths, ranging from the Heart Sūtra of a few pages to the Hundred-Thousand. A great deal of information about these sūtras can be found in the works of Dr. Edward Conze.|The sūtra in which the transcendental wisdom is taught. There are nineteen versions of different lengths, ranging from the Heart Sūtra of a few pages to the Hundred-Thousand. A great deal of information about these sūtras can be found in the works of Dr. Edward Conze. 
ཕལ-སྐད	A collective name for the colloquial dialects of the Middle Indo-Aryan languages.
སྲོག-རླུང	 Vital air in general, and also the vital air (one of the five) centered around the heart.|Vital air in general, and also the vital air (one of the five) centered around the heart. 
ཐལ-འགྱུར-བ	 The sub-school of the Mādhyamika philosophical school founded by Buddha-Pālita and further developed by Candrakīrti.|The sub-school of the Mādhyamika philosophical school founded by Buddha-Pālita and further developed by Candrakīrti. 
ཚིག-གསལ	 Candrakīrti’s major commentary on Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Stanzas on Wisdom.|Candrakīrti’s major commentary on Nāgārjuna’s Fundamental Stanzas on Wisdom. 
གསལ-རྒྱལ	 A king of Kosala.| A king of Kosala. | Son of King Arāḍa Brahmadatta of Śrāvasti. Later, as king he gave all servants in his lands permission to join the Buddhist order if they wished. |Son of King Arāḍa Brahmadatta of Śrāvasti. Later, as king he gave all servants in his lands permission to join the Buddhist order if they wished. 
བྲེ	 A unit of weight equal to thirty-two pala.|A unit of weight equal to thirty-two pala. 
ཕུལ	 The smallest measure of grain in ancient India, equivalent to about five or six ounces.|The smallest measure of grain in ancient India, equivalent to about five or six ounces. 
རབ-ཏུ-ཚ-བ	 The very hot hell; the seventh of the eight hot hells.|The very hot hell; the seventh of the eight hot hells. 
སོ-སོར-ཐར-པ	 The rules of conduct that lead to liberation.|The rules of conduct that lead to liberation. 
རང-རྒྱལ	 A hermit buddha who attains individual enlightenment, either in solitude or in small groups, without relying on a teacher.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-8). | Synonymous with pratyeka­buddha.| Synonymous with pratyeka­buddha. | “Solitary buddha.” Someone who has attained liberation entirely through their own contemplation, hence their alternate epithet, pratyayajina, which means one who has become a jina, or buddha, through dependence [on external factors that were contemplated upon]. This is the result of progress in previous lives but, unlike a buddha, they do not have the necessary accumulated merit nor the motivation to teach others. |“Solitary buddha.” Someone who has attained liberation entirely through their own contemplation, hence their alternate epithet, pratyayajina, which means one who has become a jina, or buddha, through dependence [on external factors that were contemplated upon]. This is the result of progress in previous lives but, unlike a buddha, they do not have the necessary accumulated merit nor the motivation to teach others. 
རང-སངས-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-ཐེག-པ	 The way or vehicle of the pratyeka­buddhas.|The way or vehicle of the pratyeka­buddhas. 
རིན-ཆེན-ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 Name of the second meditative stability.|Name of the second meditative stability. 
རིན-ཆེན-འབྱུང-གནས	 A buddha of the east. | One of the five buddhas.| One of the five buddhas. |Name of the twenty-ninth meditative stability. 
སྔོན-དུ-བསྙེན-པ	 A period of formal practice, usually lasting six months, before the practitioner can employ the mantra for specific purposes.|“Preliminary practice,” pūrvasevā, is a six-month period of formal practice to be performed before one can start employing the mantra for specific purposes. 
ད-ལྟར-བྱུང-བ	 Also translated as “present circumstances.”|Also translated as “present events.” 
ཡི-དགས	 A class of spirits sometimes called hungry ghosts. | A restless wandering ghost. In the Buddhist tradition, they are particularly known to suffer from hunger and thirst and the inability to acquire such sustenance. | Class of beings; literally “hungry spirit;” one of the six realms of existence.| Class of beings; literally “hungry spirit;” one of the six realms of existence. | Literally “the departed” and analagous to the ancestral spirits of Vedic tradition, the pitṛs, who starve without the offerings of descendants. They live in the realm of Yama, the Lord of Death, analogous to the underworld of Pluto in Greek mythology. In Buddhism they are said to suffer intensely, particularly from hunger and thirst. | Literally “the departed” and analagous to the ancestral spirits of the Vedic tradition, the pitṛs, who starve without the offerings of descendants. They live in the realm of Yama, the Lord of Death, analogous to the underworld of Pluto in Greek mythology. In Buddhism they are said to suffer intensely, particularly from hunger and thirst. |A restless wandering ghost. In the Buddhist tradition, they are particularly known to suffer from hunger and thirst and the inability to acquire such sustenance. 
ཡི-དབ༹གས	 “Ghost,” “Hungry ghost.”|“Ghost,” “Hungry ghost.” 
སྡོང-དུ-མ-ལྟ-བུ	 Very hot hell. Probably a variation of Pratāpana (Tib. {rab tu tsha ba}), as the name occurs in no other sūtra.|Very hot hell. Probably a variation of Pratāpana (Tib. {rab tu tsha ba}), as the name occurs in no other sūtra. 
ང-རྒྱལ	 Fourth of the five fetters associated with the higher realms.|Literally, “I king.” Arrogance or egocentrism. 
མདུན-ན-འདོན-པ	 A brahmin who serves as the king’s chaplain and chief ritual officiate for Vedic sacrifices.|A brahmin who serves as the king’s chaplain and chief ritual officiate for Vedic sacrifices. 
བྲམ-ཟེའི-རིགས	First of the four classes of traditional Indian society.
མཚན	 The thirty-two characteristics of a great being (mahāpuruṣa; {skyes bu chen po}), including the uṣṇīṣa, or head mound, and the long tongue.|The thirty-two primary physical characteristics of a “great being,” a mahāpuruṣa, which every buddha possesses. 
དགའ-བ-བཀོད-པ	 The world within which Ratnavara will attain enlightenment.|The world within which Ratnavara will attain enlightenment. 
མཐོང-ན-དགའ-བ	 “Beautiful Sight.” The name of a past eon.| “Beautiful Sight.” The name of a past eon. |“Beautiful Sight.” The name of a past eon. 
རྒྱུ-མེད-པར-སྨྲ-བ	The proponents of a theory of causelessness basically rejecting the law of karma, such as the Ājīvika or the Cārvāka.
སྒྲོ-བཏགས-པ	To superimpose existence upon something which does not exist; adherents of eternalist views superimpose existence upon something which does not exist. They grasp at a concrete reality. The opposite is the view of nihilists which denies the existence of phenomena.
སྣའི-གཟེངས-མཐོ-བ	A prominent nose, i.e. with a high nasal root, was considered an attractive feature in ancient India. This may refer to an aquiline nose.
ལུང-དུ-བསྟན-པའི-སྡེ	Third of the twelve branches of the scriptures.
ཡང-དག-པ-ཉིད-དུ-ངེས-པའི-ཚོགས	First of the three provisions.
ལོག-པ-ཉིད-དུ-ངེས-པའི-ཚོགས	Second of the three provisions.
མ-ངེས-པའི-ཚོགས	Third of the three provisions.
མཆོད-པ	 Worship that involves making offerings.|Worship that involves making offerings. 
སྐེམ-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ནབ-སོ	 One of the notorious “group of six’ monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. Also known as Punarvasuka.|One of the notorious “group of six’ monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. Also known as Punarvasuka. 
ཆད-པའི-ལས	A generic name for disciplinary acts imposed by the saṅgha.
བསོད-ནམས-བློ-གྲོས	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
བསོད-ནམས-འཕེལ	 Eleventh god realm of form, meaning “increasing merit.”|Eleventh god realm of form, meaning “increasing merit.” 
ཆུང-ཆེ	 Eleventh god realm of form, meaning “increasing merit.”|Eleventh god realm of form, meaning “increasing merit.” 
པཱུ-ར-ཀ	 Retention of breath after inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath).|Retention of breath after inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath). 
རྫོགས-བྱེད	 An abbreviation of Pūraṇa Kāśyapa.|An abbreviation of Pūraṇa Kāśyapa. 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པ	 A bodhisattva.| A bodhisattva. | The second bodhisattva level. |The second bodhisattva level. 
དག-པ-དམ-པ	 Name of the thirty-seventh meditative stability.| Name of the thirty-seventh meditative stability. |Name of the thirty-seventh meditative stability. 
སྣང-བ-དག-པ	 Name of the forty-eighth meditative stability.|Name of the forty-eighth meditative stability. 
མཁྱེན-པ-ཡོངས-སུ-དག-པ	 Seventeenth of the eighty minor marks.|Seventeenth of the eighty minor marks. 
མཚན-ཉིད-ཡོངས-སུ-དག-པ	 Name of the ninetieth meditative stability.|Name of the ninetieth meditative stability. 
སྐྱེ-མཆེད-ཤིན-ཏུ-ཡོངས-སུ-དག-པ	 Sixteenth of the eighty minor marks.|Sixteenth of the eighty minor marks. 
རྣམ-པར-དག-པ	The pure category, usually beyond the mundane, represented by any ritual implement, iconographic feature, or any other tangible element of worship.
གང-པོ	 A pupil of the Buddha who was preeminent in teaching. | Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha.| Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. | One of the first to join the Buddha’s renunciate order. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order. | Śrāvaka disciple of the Buddha noted for his ability as a preacher of the Hinayāna teaching, especially skillful in the conversion and training of young monks; also known as Pūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-934. |One of the first to join the Buddha’s renunciate order. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order. 
བྱམས-མའི-བུ-གང-པོ	 Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni. Also called Pūrṇa.\nPūrṇa\nPūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra| Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni. Also called Pūrṇa.\nPūrṇa\nPūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra | One of the ten principal pupils of the Buddha. He was the greatest in his ability to teach the Dharma. | See Pūrṇa. |Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni. Also called Pūrṇa.\nPūrṇa\nPūrṇa­maitrāyaṇī­putra 
གང-བ-བཟང-པོ	 A yakṣa. | God of wealth.| God of wealth. |A yakṣa. 
ཟླ-གང	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
དོན-སྤྱོད-པ	Third of the four attractive qualities of a bodhisattva.
ལོ-ཎི-ཡ	Portulaca oleracea, Portulaca quadrifida.
རྒྱུན-གྱི-རྗེས-སུ-སོང-བ	Name of the twenty-sixth meditative stability.
ལུས-འཕགས	 The eastern continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as “sublime in physique”|The eastern continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as “sublime in physique” 
མེ-ཏོག-སོ	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
རྒྱལ	 The sixth (sometimes the eighth) lunar asterism.|The sixth (sometimes the eighth) lunar asterism. 
སྲུལ-པོ	 A spirit that is said to cause physical illnesses. | Class of pretas that cause rotting or that have rotting corpses; literally “the rotting one.”| Class of pretas that cause rotting or that have rotting corpses; literally “the rotting one.” | Ugly and foul-smelling spirits, they can be good or cause harm to humans and animals. |A spirit that is said to cause physical illnesses. 
ལུས-ཚ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination. The correct Sanskrit may be agnidāha.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཉིན-བཞི-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
དེ-ལྟ-བུ-བྱུང-བའི-སྡེ	Seventh of the twelve branches of the scriptures.
རིམས-དྲག-པོ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
སྒྲ-གཅན	 A powerful asura, said to cause eclipses. | One of the four asura kings present at the teaching of the sūtra.| One of the four asura kings present at the teaching of the sūtra. | The demon who causes an eclipse. |A powerful asura, said to cause eclipses. 
སྒྲ-གཅན-འཛིན	 Śākyamuni Buddha’s own son, who became a distinguished disciple. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-945.|Śākyamuni Buddha’s own son, who became a distinguished disciple. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-945. 
དགྲ-གཅན	 The name of Śākyamuni’s son. Also the name of the sons of all the buddhas that Śākyamuni had received the Samādhirāja from in previous lifetimes. | Śākyamuni Buddha’s son who became the first novice monk and a prominent member of his monastic saṅgha.| Śākyamuni Buddha’s son who became the first novice monk and a prominent member of his monastic saṅgha. |The name of Śākyamuni’s son. Also the name of the sons of all the buddhas that Śākyamuni had received the Samādhirāja from in previous lifetimes. 
སྒྲ-གཅན-ཟིན	 Śrāvaka arhat, one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”).|Śrāvaka arhat, one of the sixteen sthavira arhats (see “elder”). 
སྒྲ-ཅན-ཟིན-བཟང-པོ	 Son of Siddhārtha Gautama.|Son of Siddhārtha Gautama. 
རྒྱལ-པོའི-ཁབ	 Modern Rajgir. | Now known as Rajgir and located in the modern Indian state of Bihar, Rājagṛha was the capital of the kingdom of Magadha during the Buddha’s lifetime. | Presently called Rajgir. During the Buddha’s lifetime this was the capital of Magadha, a kingdom roughly corresponding to modern southern Bihar. | Situated in the modern Indian state of Bihar, Rājagṛha was the capital of Magadha, one of the great kingdoms of ancient India. | The capital city of Magadha. | The capital of Magadhā during the Buddha’s lifetime. | The capital of the ancient kingdom of Magadha. | Town close to Nālānda in the modern state of Bihar.| Town close to Nālānda in the modern state of Bihar. | “King’s House;” name of a town in modern-day Bihar, North India. |The capital city of Magadha. 
རྒྱལ-པའོའི-ཁབ	 The capital city of the ancient Indian kingdom Magadha where the Buddha taught.|The capital city of the ancient Indian kingdom Magadha where the Buddha taught. 
རྡུལ-ཚོན-ས	 A particular part of the maṇḍala (?); the Tibetan reads “sand-colored ground”.|A particular part of the maṇḍala (?); the Tibetan reads “sand-colored ground”. 
སྲིན-པོ	 A class of demons. | A flesh-eating demon that haunts frightening places. | A general term in Indian culture for a type of spirit that (inter alia) haunts cemeteries and eats human flesh. | A race of physical beings who are ugly, evil-natured, and have a yearning for human flesh, but who also have miraculous powers, such as being able to change their appearance, as in the Kāraṇḍavyūha. | A race of ugly, evil-natured supernatural beings with a yearning for human flesh. | A race of ugly, evil-natured, supernatural beings with a yearning for human flesh. | rākṣasī| rākṣasī |A flesh-eating demon that haunts frightening places. 
སྲིན-མོ	 A female rākṣasa.| A female rākṣasa. | A female rākṣasa. Supernatural beings with a yearning for human flesh but who can also be converted into being protectors of the Dharma. |A female rākṣasa. 
རལ-པ-ཅན	 King of Tibet, who reigned 815–838 CE. Also known as Tritsuk Detsen ({khri gtug lde btsan}). | The Brahmā of the universe Aśoka, who is personally called Śikhin to distinguish him from Brahmās of other universes (see Brahmā). The second of the “seven buddhas of the past” is also called Śikhin but his name is rendered in Tibetan as {gtsug gtor can}.| The Brahmā of the universe Aśoka, who is personally called Śikhin to distinguish him from Brahmās of other universes (see Brahmā). The second of the “seven buddhas of the past” is also called Śikhin but his name is rendered in Tibetan as {gtsug gtor can}. |A king of Tibet who reigned from 815 to 838. 
རཱ-མ-དེ-བ	 The name of a vetāla.|The name of a vetāla. 
རཱ-མ-དུ-ཏི	 This has not been identified.|This has not been identified. 
རཎྜ	 This term can be a name of various plants.|This term can be a name of various plants. 
ར-ས	 Guggulu or Commiphora mukul (McHugh 2008, p 180 n28).|Guggulu or Commiphora mukul (McHugh 2008, p 180 n28). 
རོ-མ	 The prāṇa channel on the right side of the body.|The prāṇa channel on the right side of the body. 
འོད-ཟེར-རབ-ཏུ-སྣང-བ	 The name Kāśyapa will have when he becomes a buddha in the distant future.|The name Kāśyapa will have when he becomes a buddha in the distant future. 
འོད-ཟེར-བརྒྱ-སྟོང-ཡོངས-སུ-རྫོགས-པའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 The name of Yaśodharā when she becomes a buddha in the future.|The name of Yaśodharā when she becomes a buddha in the future. 
དགའ-བས-གང-བ	 “Filled with Joy.” The name of a future eon in which Mahā­maudgalyāyana will become a buddha.|“Filled with Joy.” The name of a future eon in which Mahā­maudgalyāyana will become a buddha. 
དགའ-མ-དང-ཡིད-འོང-མ	 In the Tibetan, divided into two characters, “Rati” and “Priyā.”|In the Tibetan, divided into two characters, “Rati” and “Priyā.” 
ལག-བཟང	 A principal bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna sūtras.| A principal bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna sūtras. | Synonym for Subāhu, translated as if it was Subāhu into Tibetan. |Synonym for Subāhu, translated as if it was Subāhu into Tibetan. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-ཟླ-བ	 One of the buddhas who assembled at Vimalakīrti’s house to teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka, according to the goddess.|One of the buddhas who assembled at Vimalakīrti’s house to teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka, according to the goddess. 
རིན-ཆེན-ཟླ-བ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
རིན-ཆེན-གདུགས	 Wheel-turning king said by the Buddha to be a former incarnation of the Buddha Ratnārcis.|Wheel-turning king said by the Buddha to be a former incarnation of the Buddha Ratnārcis. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-གླིང	 The Kāraṇḍavyūha in the Vaidya edition references a group of islands, the distinction between singular and plural being lost in the Tibetan. Ratnadvīpa was one of the ancient names of Laṅka, as it was a rich source of jewels. In this same passage, however, Laṅka is identified as the land of the rākṣasīs. The theme of an ocean island rich in jewels appears frequently in Buddhist narratives.|The Kāraṇḍavyūha in the Vaidya edition references a group of islands, the distinction between singular and plural being lost in the Tibetan. Ratnadvīpa was one of the ancient names of Laṅka, as it was a rich source of jewels. In this same passage, however, Laṅka is identified as the land of the rākṣasīs. The theme of an ocean island rich in jewels appears frequently in Buddhist narratives. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-འབྱུང-གནས	 Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. | One of “the sixteen excellent men.” | Wealthy young Licchavi noble who leads the delegation that brings the precious parasols to the Buddha. |Wealthy young Licchavi noble who leads the delegation that brings the precious parasols to the Buddha. 
རིན-ཆེན-འབྱུང-གནས-ཞི-བ	 An important 11th century Buddhist monastic scholar who wrote prolifically on a number on both Mahāyāna and Mantrayāna works.|An important 11th century Buddhist monastic scholar who wrote prolifically on a number on both Mahāyāna and Mantrayāna works. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-ཏོག	 A buddha who lives in the realm known as Jewel World. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. |A buddha who lives in the realm known as Jewel World. 
རིན-ཆེན-ཏོག	 See “Ratnaketurāja.”|See “Ratnaketurāja.” 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-ཏོག-གི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 The name of two thousand pupils of the Buddha when they become buddhas.|The name of two thousand pupils of the Buddha when they become buddhas. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-རྣ-ཆ	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
རིན-ཆེན-མེ-ཏོག	 According to the commentary, an alternative name for Ratnapāṇi|According to the commentary, an alternative name for Ratnapāṇi 
དཀོན-མཆོག-བློ-གྲོས	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
ལག-ན-རིན-པོ-ཆེ	 In the Kāraṇdavyūha Sūtra he is described in Śākyamuni’s memories as the bodhisattava who questions Buddha Vipaśyin. He is the principal bodhisattva being addressed by Śākyamuni in chapter 35 of the Avatamsaka Sūtra. In the early tantras he is one of the sixteen bodhisattvas in the dharmadhātu mandala. In the higher tantras he is associated with the Ratna family of Buddha Ratnasambhava. | In the Kāraṇḍavyūha he is, as well as being listed as present at Buddha Śākyamuni’s teachings, the one who is described in Śākyamuni’s memories as the bodhisattva who questions Buddha Vipaśyin. He is the principal bodhisattva being addressed by Śākyamuni in chapter 35 of the Avatamsaka Sūtra. In the early tantras he is one of the sixteen bodhisattvas in the dharmadhātu maṇḍala. In the higher tantras he is associated with the ratna family of Buddha Ratnasambhava.| In the Kāraṇḍavyūha he is, as well as being listed as present at Buddha Śākyamuni’s teachings, the one who is described in Śākyamuni’s memories as the bodhisattva who questions Buddha Vipaśyin. He is the principal bodhisattva being addressed by Śākyamuni in chapter 35 of the Avatamsaka Sūtra. In the early tantras he is one of the sixteen bodhisattvas in the dharmadhātu maṇḍala. In the higher tantras he is associated with the ratna family of Buddha Ratnasambhava. |In the Kāraṇdavyūha Sūtra he is described in Śākyamuni’s memories as the bodhisattava who questions Buddha Vipaśyin. He is the principal bodhisattva being addressed by Śākyamuni in chapter 35 of the Avatamsaka Sūtra. In the early tantras he is one of the sixteen bodhisattvas in the dharmadhātu mandala. In the higher tantras he is associated with the Ratna family of Buddha Ratnasambhava. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-རི	 A mountain.|A mountain. 
རིན-ཆེན-འོད	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. Also the name of a deva in Śakra’s retinue.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. Also the name of a deva in Śakra’s retinue. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-འོད-འཕྲོ	 One of the buddhas who appear in the house of Vimalakīrti on esoteric occasions. According to the Prajñā­pāramitā, he is the Buddha of the universe Upaśānta, in the western direction (see Lamotte, p. 384, n. 27).|One of the buddhas who appear in the house of Vimalakīrti on esoteric occasions. According to the Prajñā­pāramitā, he is the Buddha of the universe Upaśānta, in the western direction (see Lamotte, p. 384, n. 27). 
རིན-ཆེན-འོད-འཕྲོད	 A buddha of the west.|A buddha of the west. 
རིན-ཆེན-འབྱུང-ལྡན	 A buddha of the south.|A buddha of the south. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-འབྱུང-བ	 The realm in which Subhūti will achieve buddhahood.|The realm in which Subhūti will achieve buddhahood. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-གཙུག-ཕུད	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-དཔལ	 One of the buddhas who appear in the house of Vimalakīrti on esoteric occasions; the Sanskrit name, but with a different rendering in Tibetan, also refers to a bodhisattva.|One of the buddhas who appear in the house of Vimalakīrti on esoteric occasions; the Sanskrit name, but with a different rendering in Tibetan, also refers to a bodhisattva. 
རིན-ཆེན-དཔལ	 A bodhisattva; the Sanskrit name, but with a different rendering in Tibetan, also refers to a tathāgata.|A bodhisattva; the Sanskrit name, but with a different rendering in Tibetan, also refers to a tathāgata. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-དཔལ-གྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-སྣང-བ	 “The Light of Jewels.” A future eon in which Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra will become a buddha.|“The Light of Jewels.” A future eon in which Pūrṇa Maitrāyaṇī­putra will become a buddha. 
རིན-ཆེན-ཕྲེང-བ	 An important work of Nāgārjuna’s, in which he concisely summarizes the ethical, psychological, and philosophical teachings of the Mahāyāna.|An important work of Nāgārjuna’s, in which he concisely summarizes the ethical, psychological, and philosophical teachings of the Mahāyāna. 
རིན-ཆེན-ལྡན-པ	 A palace in a past eon.|A palace in a past eon. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-རྣམ-པར-དག-པ	 A distant realm to the east, where Buddha Prabhūtaratna had lived.|A distant realm to the east, where Buddha Prabhūtaratna had lived. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-དཀོད-པ	 Lit. “Jewel-Array.” Name of one of the bodhisattvas in the original assembly (rendered in Tibetan as {rin chen bkod pa}); also the name (with several renderings in Tibetan) of a Buddha who presides in the universe called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha, yet who comes to Vimalakīrti’s house at the latter’s supplication, to participate in the esoteric teachings. He can be identified with the Tathāgata Ratnasaṃbhava, one of the five major buddhas of the Guhya­samāja­tantra.|Lit. “Jewel-Array.” Name of one of the bodhisattvas in the original assembly (rendered in Tibetan as {rin chen bkod pa}); also the name (with several renderings in Tibetan) of a Buddha who presides in the universe called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha, yet who comes to Vimalakīrti’s house at the latter’s supplication, to participate in the esoteric teachings. He can be identified with the Tathāgata Ratnasaṃbhava, one of the five major buddhas of the Guhya­samāja­tantra. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-བཀོད-པ	 Lit. “Jewel-Array.” Name of one of the bodhisattvas in the original assembly (rendered in Tibetan as {rin chen bkod pa}); also the name (with several renderings in Tibetan) of a Buddha who presides in the universe called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha, yet who comes to Vimalakīrti’s house at the latter’s supplication, to participate in the esoteric teachings. He can be identified with the Tathāgata Ratnasaṃbhava, one of the five major buddhas of the Guhya­samāja­tantra.|Lit. “Jewel-Array.” Name of one of the bodhisattvas in the original assembly (rendered in Tibetan as {rin chen bkod pa}); also the name (with several renderings in Tibetan) of a Buddha who presides in the universe called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha, yet who comes to Vimalakīrti’s house at the latter’s supplication, to participate in the esoteric teachings. He can be identified with the Tathāgata Ratnasaṃbhava, one of the five major buddhas of the Guhya­samāja­tantra. 
རིན-ཆེན-བཀོད-པ	 Lit. “Jewel-Array.” Name of one of the bodhisattvas in the original assembly (rendered in Tibetan as {rin chen bkod pa}); also the name (with several renderings in Tibetan) of a Buddha who presides in the universe called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha, yet who comes to Vimalakīrti’s house at the latter’s supplication, to participate in the esoteric teachings. He can be identified with the Tathāgata Ratnasaṃbhava, one of the five major buddhas of the Guhya­samāja­tantra. | The name by which Ratnavara will be known when he becomes a buddha.| The name by which Ratnavara will be known when he becomes a buddha. |Lit. “Jewel-Array.” Name of one of the bodhisattvas in the original assembly (rendered in Tibetan as {rin chen bkod pa}); also the name (with several renderings in Tibetan) of a Buddha who presides in the universe called Ananta­guṇa­ratna­vyūha, yet who comes to Vimalakīrti’s house at the latter’s supplication, to participate in the esoteric teachings. He can be identified with the Tathāgata Ratnasaṃbhava, one of the five major buddhas of the Guhya­samāja­tantra. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-ཏོག	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
རིན-ཆེན-མེ-ཏོག-ཤིན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པའི-རིགས	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ལག-ན-ཕྱག-རྒྱ-རིན-པོ-ཆེ	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེའི-པད-མའི-ཟླ-བ-རྣམ-པར-དག-པ-མངོན-པར-འཕགས-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha countless eons in the past.|A buddha countless eons in the past. 
དཀོན-མཆོག-གཟི-བརྗིད-མངོན-འཕགས-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha in the eastern direction.|A buddha in the eastern direction. 
རིན-ཆེན-ཨུད-པ-ལའི-དཔལ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
དམར-པོའི-མཆོག	 This Buddha who sends the previous life of Śākyamuni to Buddha Padmottama. However, the Tibetan had {dmar po'i mchog}, “supreme red,” which would have been a translation of Raktottama, evidently a mistake for Ratnottama, which would have been translated as {nor bu'i mchog} or {rin chen mchog}.|This Buddha who sends the previous life of Śākyamuni to Buddha Padmottama. However, the Tibetan had {dmar po'i mchog}, “supreme red,” which would have been a translation of Raktottama, evidently a mistake for Ratnottama, which would have been translated as {nor bu'i mchog} or {rin chen mchog}. 
འོ-དོད-འབོད-པ	 The fourth of the eight hot hells. In later translations it is {ngu 'bod}, which also means “wailing” as a compound of the words for “weep” and “shout.”|The fourth of the eight hot hells. In later translations it is {ngu 'bod}, which also means “wailing” as a compound of the words for “weep” and “shout.” 
མོན-དར	 An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.|An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
ལྡོང-རོས	Arsenic ore, used as a yellow pigment.
དོན-དམ-བདེན-པ	 See “ultimate truth.” | Ultimate truth is defined as a synonym of emptiness, the ultimate nature of phenomena, in contrast to the relative truth of conventionally experienced perceptions. Also translated here as “ultimate reality.”| Ultimate truth is defined as a synonym of emptiness, the ultimate nature of phenomena, in contrast to the relative truth of conventionally experienced perceptions. Also translated here as “ultimate reality.” |See “ultimate truth.” 
གཤིན-རྗེའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Another name for the hungry ghost realm.|Another name for the hungry ghost realm. 
སྐྱེ	reborn
ས-གསུམ	 That is to say, the animal realm, the realm of anguished spirits and the denizens of the hells.|That is to say, the animal realm, the realm of anguished spirits and the denizens of the hells. 
རེ-ཙ-ཀ	 Exhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath).|Exhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath). 
དགེ-འདུན-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Third of the ten recollections.| Third of the ten recollections. |Third of the ten recollections. 
འཆི-བ-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Tenth of the ten recollections.|Tenth of the ten recollections. 
གཏོང-བ-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Fifth of the ten recollections.| Fifth of the ten recollections. |Fifth of the ten recollections. 
དབུགས-འབྱུང-བ-དང-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Eighth of the ten recollections.|Eighth of the ten recollections. 
ལུས-སུ-གཏོགས-པ-རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ	 Ninth of the ten recollections.|Ninth of the ten recollections. 
སྣྲེལ-ཞིའི-རྒྱུད	The twelfth of the eighteen special qualities of a bodhisattva.\nreconciling dichotomies
སྣྲེལ-ཞི-བ	The twelfth of the eighteen special qualities of a bodhisattva.\nreconciling dichotomies
སྒོ-འཕར	Financial records or accounts. Also means “door panel”.
ལ-དམར	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བེའུ-རས-དམར-པོ	 An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.|An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
སྐྱབས-སུ-འགྲོ-བ-གསུམ	 Refuge taken in the Buddha, his teaching, and the assembly of followers.|Refuge taken in the Buddha, his teaching, and the assembly of followers. 
ཕྱི-རོལ-གྱི-གཟུགས-སྔོན-པོ-ལ-ལྟ-བ	Third of the eight sense fields of mastery.
གཟུགས-ཆེན-པོར-གྱུར-པ-ལ-ལྟ-བ	Second of the eight sense fields of mastery.\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-207.
གཟུགས-ཆུང-ངུ-ལ-ལྟ-བ	First of the eight sense fields of mastery.\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-207.
ཕྱི-རོལ-གྱི-གཟུགས-དམར-པོ-ལ-ལྟ-བ	Fifth of the eight sense fields of mastery.
ཕྱི-རོལ-གྱི-གཟུགས-དཀར-པོ-ལ-ལྟ-བ	Sixth of the eight sense fields of mastery.
ཕྱི-རོལ-གྱི-གཟུགས-སེར-པོ-ལ-ལྟ-བ	Fourth of the eight sense fields of mastery.
ཀུན-རྫོབ	Of seeming and apparent truth or reality.
ཀུན-རྫོབ-ཀྱི-བདེན-པ	 This denotes the empirical aspect of reality as conventionally experienced through our perceptions, which, in contrast to ultimate reality or emptiness, is considered true only within the relative framework of our own experiences.|This denotes the empirical aspect of reality as conventionally experienced through our perceptions, which, in contrast to ultimate reality or emptiness, is considered true only within the relative framework of our own experiences. 
སྡུག-པའི-རྣམ-པར-ཐར-པ	Literally, “release from pleasant states.”
རབ-ཏུ-འབྱུང	 become renunciant| become renunciant |become renunciant 
དགའ-བ-སྤོང-བ	 Name of the fifty-eighth meditative stability.|Name of the fifty-eighth meditative stability. 
རིམ-འགྲོ-བྱེད	 Also translated here as “respect.”|Also translated here as “serve.” 
ཆུས-བགགས-པ	 Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.|Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011. 
གཟུངས-ཀྱི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 Name of the nineteenth meditative stability.| Name of the nineteenth meditative stability. |Name of the nineteenth meditative stability. 
རྒན-ཞུགས	This term refers to those who renounce the world late in life, generally after having had and raised children of their own. It is somewhat pejorative; it is telling, for instance, that such monastics are directly addressed as “retired devotees” rather than as “venerable,” the customary address for ordained monks.
ནམ-གྲུ	 The youngest brother of Śāriputra. | Śrāvaka arhat.| Śrāvaka arhat. |The youngest brother of Śāriputra. 
གཞུག-པ	A skill taught to brahmins and kings that may relate to finance or grammar.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-142.
འབྲས-ཟན	An acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
གནས-མེད-པར-སྤྱོད-པ	Name of the sixty-seventh meditative stability.
སྣང-མཛད	 Mentioned by the Buddha as the last of the thousand buddhas of this eon.| Mentioned by the Buddha as the last of the thousand buddhas of this eon. |Mentioned by the Buddha as the last of the thousand buddhas of this eon. 
སྨིག-བཅུད	 In the Cakra­saṃvara-tantra, rocanā is a medical concretion or bezoar stone found within the organs of certain animals (Gray, 2007, p 207 n3). Alternatively, Monier-Williams identifies it as “a particular yellow pigment,” or even a plant. It is unclear to us what the term refers to in this particular context.|In the Cakra­saṃvara-tantra, rocanā is a medical concretion or bezoar stone found within the organs of certain animals (Gray, 2007, p 207 n3). Alternatively, Monier-Williams identifies it as “a particular yellow pigment,” or even a plant. It is unclear to us what the term refers to in this particular context. 
བྲག-ཕུག	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཚུལ-དང-འབྲེལ-བའི-གཟུགས-བརྙན	As a monk should regard his abbot as a surrogate father, the abbot is referred to as a “role model.”
ཁང-སྟེང-གི-ཡོལ-ཁང	 An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.|An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
དགེ-བའི-རྩ-བ	 Wholesome actions that are conducive to happiness.|Wholesome actions that are conducive to happiness. 
བ-གམ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
སོར-མོ-རྣམས-ཟླུམ-པ	 Tenth of the eighty minor marks.\nrounded fingers and toes|Tenth of the eighty minor marks.\nrounded fingers and toes 
དྲང-སྲོང-ལྷུང-བ	 The forest, also referred to as a deer forest, where the Buddha taught his first five pupils.|The forest, also referred to as a deer forest, where the Buddha taught his first five pupils. 
དྲང-སྲོང-སྨྲ-བ	 A sacred area located outside of Vārāṇasī where many sages are said to have practiced in the past.|A sacred area located outside of Vārāṇasī where many sages are said to have practiced in the past. 
ལྷག-སྤྱོད	 Although the spelling Rudraka is attested in the Sanskrit of this sūtra, in most other texts his name is Udraka, or Udraka Rāmaputra (“Udraka the son of Rāma”).|Although the spelling Rudraka is attested in the Sanskrit of this sūtra, in most other texts his name is Udraka, or Udraka Rāmaputra (“Udraka the son of Rāma”). 
དབང-མོ	 The wife of Indra; also the name of an apsaras.|The wife of Indra; also the name of an apsaras. 
དམ-ཚིག-གྱི-རྫས	Sacramental substances ingested as part of tantric ritual; frequently composed of bodily fluids or illicit meats.
ཆོས-དམ-པའི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 Name of the fifty-sixth meditative stability.| Name of the fifty-sixth meditative stability. |Name of the fifty-sixth meditative stability. 
དགེ-མཚན	A symbol of the status of the priestly class at the apex of traditional Indian society.
ཡི-གེ-དྲུག-པའི-རིག-སྔགས-ཆེན-མོའི-རྒྱལ-མོ	 See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.”| See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.” |See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.” 
རྟག-ཏུ-བརྙས-པ	 A bodhisattva in the distant past, whose name has been translated to mean “Constantly Ridiculed” (sadā-pari­bhūta) in Tibetan and by Burnouf from the Sanskrit. The Chinese translation and Kern from the Sanskrit translate it as “Never Ridiculed” (sadā-apari­bhūta). The difference results from how the compound is broken apart. It is the Chinese and Kern version that better fits the context.|A bodhisattva in the distant past, whose name has been translated to mean “Constantly Ridiculed” (sadā-pari­bhūta) in Tibetan and by Burnouf from the Sanskrit. The Chinese translation and Kern from the Sanskrit translate it as “Never Ridiculed” (sadā-apari­bhūta). The difference results from how the compound is broken apart. It is the Chinese and Kern version that better fits the context. 
སྒྲུབ-པ-པོ	 One who performs a sādhana.|One who performs a sādhana. 
སྒྲུབ-ཐབས	 Practice involving mantra and visualization.| Practice involving mantra and visualization. | The method of practice. Experiential methods for actualizing spiritual attainments and liberation.\npractice method |The method of practice. Experiential methods for actualizing spiritual attainments and liberation.\npractice method 
ལེ-བརྒན-རྩི	Carthamus tinctorius.
ངུར-སྨྲིག-གི-རྒྱལ-མཚན-གྱི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of a tathāgata.|Realm of a tathāgata. 
རྒྱ-མཚོ	 The principal nāga king. In the Samādhi­rāja Sūtra (http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html) this is said to be another name for Vaṛuna, the deity of the water.| The principal nāga king. In the Samādhi­rāja Sūtra (http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html) this is said to be another name for Vaṛuna, the deity of the water. | The principal nāga king; in this sūtra another name for Vaṛuna. |The principal nāga king; in this sūtra another name for Vaṛuna. 
རྒྱ-མཚོའི-དཔལ	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
རྒྱ-མཚོ-བློ-འཛིན	 A short form of Sāgara­vara­dhara­buddhi­vikrīḍitābhijña, the name that Ānanda will have when he is a buddha.|A short form of Sāgara­vara­dhara­buddhi­vikrīḍitābhijña, the name that Ānanda will have when he is a buddha. 
རྒྱ-མཚོ-མཆོག-འཆང-བློ-རྣམ-པར-རོལ-པའི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 The name of Ānanda when he becomes a buddha in the future.|The name of Ānanda when he becomes a buddha in the future. 
མི-མཇེད	 A name for the “world” in which we live. | Indian Buddhist name for either the four-continent sun-and-moon world system in which Buddha Śākyamuni appeared, or a universe of a thousand million such worlds. The White Lotus of Compassion Sutra describes it as a world of ordinary beings in which desire, and so on, are “powerful” (Sanskrit: sahas), and hence the name. The Tibetan translation {mi mjed} (literally “no suffering”) is usually defined as meaning “endurance,” because beings there are able to endure suffering. | Indian Buddhist name for the thousand-million world universe of ordinary beings. It means “endurance,” as beings there have to endure suffering. | Indian Buddhist name usually referring to the trichiliocosm, the world system that is the universe of ordinary beings, but sometimes only to our own world with four continents around Mount Meru. It means “endurance,” as beings there have to endure suffering. | The present world. | This universe of ours, or the trichiliocosm (but sometimes referring to just this world system of four continents), presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect). | This universe of ours, presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect).| This universe of ours, presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect). | Universe and buddhafield of Śākyamuni; our world. |Indian Buddhist name usually referring to the trichiliocosm, the world system that is the universe of ordinary beings, but sometimes only to our own world with four continents around Mount Meru. It means “endurance,” as beings there have to endure suffering. 
མི-མཇེད-ཀྱི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 This present world-system or trichiliocosm. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness (because the beings who inhabit it do not fear the three poisons), or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect). | This universe of ours, or the trichiliocosm (but sometimes referring to just this world system of four continents), presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect). | This universe of ours, presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect).| This universe of ours, presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect). |This universe of ours, or the trichiliocosm (but sometimes referring to just this world system of four continents), presided over by Brahmā. The term is variously interpreted as meaning the world of suffering, of endurance, of fearlessness, or of concomitance (of karmic cause and effect). 
རྡོ-དྲེག	 Bitumen, benzoin, or lichen (McHugh, 2008, p 180 n25).|Bitumen, benzoin, or lichen (McHugh, 2008, p 180 n25). 
ཤཱ-ཀྱ	 Name of the tribe dwelling in Northern India in which Gautama, or Śākyamuni, Buddha was born as prince Siddhārtha. | The clan into which the Buddha was born.| The clan into which the Buddha was born. |Name of the tribe dwelling in Northern India in which Gautama, or Śākyamuni, Buddha was born as prince Siddhārtha. 
ཤཱ-ཀྱ-ཐུབ-པ	 Our historical buddha. | The buddha of this eon and world. | The historical Buddha.| The historical Buddha. | The name of the historical Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama; he was a muni (sage) from the Śākya clan. | The “Sage of the Śākyas,” name of the Buddha of our era, who lived c. 563-483 B.C. |The “Sage of the Śākyas,” name of the Buddha of our era, who lived c. 563-483 B.C. 
ཤཱཀྱ-ཐུབ-པ	 The buddha of this age; the historical buddha. | The name of the historical Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama. In The White Lotus of the Good Dharma he is said to be in the northeast of the Sahā universe.| The name of the historical Buddha, Siddhartha Gautama. In The White Lotus of the Good Dharma he is said to be in the northeast of the Sahā universe. |The buddha of this age; the historical buddha. 
ཤཱ-ཀྱ-མཁྱུ-མཆོག	 Literally, “the Bull of the Śākyas.” This is similar to Śākyamuni, “the Sage of the Śākyas,” the Śākyas being the Buddha’s clan.|Literally, “the Bull of the Śākyas.” This is similar to Śākyamuni, “the Sage of the Śākyas,” the Śākyas being the Buddha’s clan. 
ཤཱཀྱ-སེང-གེ	 “Śākya lion.” Synonymous with Śākyamuni, “Śākya sage.”|“Śākya lion.” Synonymous with Śākyamuni, “Śākya sage.” 
ཤཱ-ཀྱ-འཕེལ	 A yakṣa that was the protective deity for the Śākya clan, which was the Buddha’s clan. The Śākyas had a temple devoted to him and he is represented in sculpture as being present at his birth.|A yakṣa that was the protective deity for the Śākya clan, which was the Buddha’s clan. The Śākyas had a temple devoted to him and he is represented in sculpture as being present at his birth. 
སཱ-ལ	Shorea robusta. This is the dominant tree in the forests where it occurs. Also known as the sakhua or shala tree. It is the tree under which the Buddha was born.
ཤིང-སཱ-ལ	 A hardwood tree, Shorea robusta, widespread on the Indian subcontinent.|A hardwood tree, Shorea robusta, widespread on the Indian subcontinent. 
ས-ལ	 Vatica robusta.|Vatica robusta. 
ཤིང-ས-ལ	Usually identified as Shorea robusta, known as the kind of tree under which the Buddha was born and passed away.
ས-ལའི-མེ-ཏོག-ཀུན-ཏུ-རྒྱས-པའི-དབང-པོའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
སཱ-ལའི-དབང-པོའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha in the future. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | The buddha from whom Śakyamuni received the Samādhirāja in a previous life. |The buddha from whom Śakyamuni received the Samādhirāja in a previous life. 
ཤམ-བ-ལ	 The hell of the Simul trees, also called cotton trees, that have vicious thorns. The Tibetan had a corrupted, transliterated version of the name. This is classed among the neighboring hells. It is where beings continually climb up and down the trees in search of a loved one.|The hell of the Simul trees, also called cotton trees, that have vicious thorns. The Tibetan had a corrupted, transliterated version of the name. This is classed among the neighboring hells. It is where beings continually climb up and down the trees in search of a loved one. 
ཏིང-ངེ-འཛིན-གྱི-གླང-པོ-དམ-པའི-དཔལ	 A buddha of the northeast.|A buddha of the northeast. 
མཉམ-གནས	 One of the five vital airs, centered in the navel area.|One of the five vital airs, centered in the navel area. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-བཟང-པོ	 A Buddhist deity; the name of a bodhisattva; also the name of the deity asking Vajrasattva questions at the time of the delivery of the CMT. | A bodhisattva. | A forest in a past eon. | A principal bodhisattva in the Mahāyāna sūtras. Not to be confused with the primordial buddha of the Nyingma tradition. | One of the eight principal bodhisattvas, he figures strongly in the Gaṇḍavyūha (the final chapter of the Avataṃsaka­sūtra) and in the Lotus Sūtra. His prominence in these sūtras is the reason why emphasis is placed on Avalokiteśvara’s superiority over him. (Not to be confused with the buddha in the Nyingma tradition.)| One of the eight principal bodhisattvas, he figures strongly in the Gaṇḍavyūha (the final chapter of the Avataṃsaka­sūtra) and in the Lotus Sūtra. His prominence in these sūtras is the reason why emphasis is placed on Avalokiteśvara’s superiority over him. (Not to be confused with the buddha in the Nyingma tradition.) |A bodhisattva. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-དྲི	 A deva in the retinue of Śakra.|A deva in the retinue of Śakra. 
འོད-ཟེར-ཀུན-ནས-འབྱུང-བ	 A bodhisattva of the east.|A bodhisattva of the east. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-སྣང	 See “Samanta­prabhāsa.”|See “Samanta­prabhāsa.” 
འོད-ཟེར-ཀུན-ནས-འཕགས-པའི-དཔལ-བརྩེགས-རྒྱལ-པོ	 “King of Heaped Splendors That Shine Above All.” The name that Avalokiteśvara will have when he becomes a tathāgata. The Sanskrit name is attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra.|“King of Heaped Splendors That Shine Above All.” The name that Avalokiteśvara will have when he becomes a tathāgata. The Sanskrit name is attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra. 
སྙོམས-པར-གཞོག-པ	 One of the synonyms for the meditative state. The Tibetan translation interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level,” whereas it may very well be like “samādhi,” sam-āpatti, with the same meaning.| One of the synonyms for the meditative state. The Tibetan translation interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level,” whereas it may very well be like “samādhi,” sam-āpatti, with the same meaning. | One of the synonyms for the meditative state. The Tibetan translation interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level,” whereas it may very well be like “samādhi,” sam-āpatti, with the similar meaning of concentration. Unlike samādhi, however, it also occurs with the meaning of “completion,” “attainment,” and “diligent practice.” |One of the synonyms for the meditative state. The Tibetan translation interpreted it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level,” whereas it may very well be like “samādhi,” sam-āpatti, with the similar meaning of concentration. Unlike samādhi, however, it also occurs with the meaning of “completion,” “attainment,” and “diligent practice.” 
སྙོམ-པར-འཇུག-པ	 One of the synonyms for the meditative state, in tems of both the state itself and the various meditative states that serve as attainments along the path. The Tibetan translation interprets it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level;” however, it can also be parsed as sam-āpatti, in which case it would have the sense of “concentration,” or “absorption,” much like “samādhi,” but with the added sense of “completion.”|One of the synonyms for the meditative state, in tems of both the state itself and the various meditative states that serve as attainments along the path. The Tibetan translation interprets it as sama-āpatti, which brings in the idea of “equal,” or “level;” however, it can also be parsed as sam-āpatti, in which case it would have the sense of “concentration,” or “absorption,” much like “samādhi,” but with the added sense of “completion.” 
བདེ-མཆོག	 A leader of the asuras.|A leader of the asuras. 
འབྱུང-བ	 A realm in the distant past.|A realm in the distant past. 
ལོངས-སྦྱོད-རྫོགས-པའི-སྐུ	 The “body of bliss,” one of the three (sometimes four) bodies of the Buddha.|The “body of bliss,” one of the three (sometimes four) bodies of the Buddha. 
མདོ-སྡེ-དགོངས-འགྲེལ	 The “Sūtra of the Revelation of the Inner Intention,” it was the most important Mahāyāna sūtra for Āryāsaṅga and the Vijñānavāda school.|The “Sūtra of the Revelation of the Inner Intention,” it was the most important Mahāyāna sūtra for Āryāsaṅga and the Vijñānavāda school. 
ཆོས-ཐམས-ཅད-མཉམ-པ-ཉིད	 As well as its more general meaning, this is the name of the fifty-seventh meditative stability.|As well as its more general meaning, this is the name of the fifty-seventh meditative stability. 
སྨྲ-འདོད-ཀྱི-བུ-མོའི-བུ-ཡང-དག-རྒྱལ-བ-ཅན	 One of the six outsider teachers.\nSaṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra|One of the six outsider teachers.\nSaṃjāyin Vairaṭi­putra 
ཤཾ-ཀཱ-རི-ཎཱི	 A goddess invoked to counter the effects of poison.|A goddess invoked to counter the effects of poison. 
འཕོ-བ	 Unit of time related to the counting of breath.|Unit of time related to the counting of breath. 
ཡང-དག	 A yakṣa in this tantra. Although {yang dag} is normally translated as “Viśuddha,” we have rendered it here as “Samprajñāna” since this is the Sanskrit rendering of this particular yakṣa’s name in the list of name mantras at 2.14.|A yakṣa in this tantra. Although {yang dag} is normally translated as “Viśuddha,” we have rendered it here as “Samprajñāna” since this is the Sanskrit rendering of this particular yakṣa’s name in the list of name mantras at 2.14. 
འཁོར-བའི-འཁོར-ལོ-ཆ-ལྔ-པ-གཡོ-བ-དང-མི-གཡོ-བ	The five realms of gods, humans, animals, spirits, and hell-denizens. “Ever-revolving” is an adjective applied to saṃsāra with its constant fluctuations.
ཡོངས-སུ-དགའ-ལྡན	 King of the gods of the Tuṣita heaven.|King of the gods of the Tuṣita heaven. 
བྱིན-གྱིས-བརླབ-པ	A monk’s robes are sanctioned at ordination. Furthermore, two types of transgressions, transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha and offenses entailing forfeiture, must be formally sanctioned or excused in order to be completely expunged.
དྲི-གཙང-ཁང	A special room or shrine dedicated to a buddha, intended as both residence and reliquary. A common feature especially in rock-cut temples.
དགེ-འདུན-ལྷག-མ	 One of five types of transgressions a monk can incur. Second only to a defeat in severity, there are thirteen transgressions requiring transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha. Transgressions of the monastic vows are classed as either atonable (Skt. sāvaśeṣa; Tib. {lhag bcas}) or unatonable (Skt. nirvaśeṣa; Tib. {lhag med}). Unatonable transgressions, such as defeats, entail loss of one’s monk- or nunhood while atonable transgressions can be atoned for in prescribed ways, according to the severity of the offense. When a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha, the saṅgha imposes a demotion or probation during which the monk must endure a loss of status and privilege and give regular reports on his conduct. Upon completion of this period of penance, the saṅgha may then reinstate the monk with full honors and privileges. There is no consensus on the exact referent of the Sanskrit term vaśeṣa or its Tibetan translation {lhag ma}, though it seems to refer to the “remnant” or “remainder” of a monastic’s precepts that persist in the wake of atonable transgressions. The translation “transgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha” (Tib. {dge 'dun lhag ma}, Skt. saṅghāvaśeṣa)—literally “saṅgha remnant”—follows Kalyāṇamitra’s gloss: a group of “saṅgha” meet to impose a disciplinary act upon an offending monk who retains a remnant of his monastic precepts (Kalyāṇamitra, F.292.a.6-7)\ntransgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha| One of five types of transgressions a monk can incur. Second only to a defeat in severity, there are thirteen transgressions requiring transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha. Transgressions of the monastic vows are classed as either atonable (Skt. sāvaśeṣa; Tib. {lhag bcas}) or unatonable (Skt. nirvaśeṣa; Tib. {lhag med}). Unatonable transgressions, such as defeats, entail loss of one’s monk- or nunhood while atonable transgressions can be atoned for in prescribed ways, according to the severity of the offense. When a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha, the saṅgha imposes a demotion or probation during which the monk must endure a loss of status and privilege and give regular reports on his conduct. Upon completion of this period of penance, the saṅgha may then reinstate the monk with full honors and privileges. There is no consensus on the exact referent of the Sanskrit term vaśeṣa or its Tibetan translation {lhag ma}, though it seems to refer to the “remnant” or “remainder” of a monastic’s precepts that persist in the wake of atonable transgressions. The translation “transgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha” (Tib. {dge 'dun lhag ma}, Skt. saṅghāvaśeṣa)—literally “saṅgha remnant”—follows Kalyāṇamitra’s gloss: a group of “saṅgha” meet to impose a disciplinary act upon an offending monk who retains a remnant of his monastic precepts (Kalyāṇamitra, F.292.a.6-7)\ntransgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha |One of five types of transgressions a monk can incur. Second only to a defeat in severity, there are thirteen transgressions requiring transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha. Transgressions of the monastic vows are classed as either atonable (Skt. sāvaśeṣa; Tib. {lhag bcas}) or unatonable (Skt. nirvaśeṣa; Tib. {lhag med}). Unatonable transgressions, such as defeats, entail loss of one’s monk- or nunhood while atonable transgressions can be atoned for in prescribed ways, according to the severity of the offense. When a monk incurs a transgression whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha, the saṅgha imposes a demotion or probation during which the monk must endure a loss of status and privilege and give regular reports on his conduct. Upon completion of this period of penance, the saṅgha may then reinstate the monk with full honors and privileges. There is no consensus on the exact referent of the Sanskrit term vaśeṣa or its Tibetan translation {lhag ma}, though it seems to refer to the “remnant” or “remainder” of a monastic’s precepts that persist in the wake of atonable transgressions. The translation “transgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha” (Tib. {dge 'dun lhag ma}, Skt. saṅghāvaśeṣa)—literally “saṅgha remnant”—follows Kalyāṇamitra’s gloss: a group of “saṅgha” meet to impose a disciplinary act upon an offending monk who retains a remnant of his monastic precepts (Kalyāṇamitra, F.292.a.6-7)\ntransgressions whose remnant is restored by the saṅgha 
དགེ-འདུན-འཚོ	 A disciple of Śāriputra who was abducted by nāgas and taken back to their land under the sea where he helped three young nāgas memorize the Four Āgamas, thereby establishing the sūtras in the land of the nāgas.|A disciple of Śāriputra who was abducted by nāgas and taken back to their land under the sea where he helped three young nāgas memorize the Four Āgamas, thereby establishing the sūtras in the land of the nāgas. 
སྟོན-པ-ཡང-དག-རྒྱལ	 Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana joined his order after rejecting the six tīrthika teachers.\nteacher Sañjayin| Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana joined his order after rejecting the six tīrthika teachers.\nteacher Sañjayin |Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana joined his order after rejecting the six tīrthika teachers.\nteacher Sañjayin 
ཞི-བའི-ཡིད	 In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error.|In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. 
ཞི-བའི-དབང-པོ	 In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba'i dbang po} and the second time as {zhi dbang}.|In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba'i dbang po} and the second time as {zhi dbang}. 
ཞི-དབང	 In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba'i dbang po} and the second time as {zhi dbang}.|In the list of buddhas Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja from this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {zhi ba'i dbang po} and the second time as {zhi dbang}. 
ཞི-བ-ལྷ	 (Eighth century). A great master of the Mādhyamika, famous for his remarkable work, “Introduction to the Practice of Enlightenment” (Bodhi­caryāvatāra).|(Eighth century). A great master of the Mādhyamika, famous for his remarkable work, “Introduction to the Practice of Enlightenment” (Bodhi­caryāvatāra). 
ཞི-བའི-ལྷ	 Eighth-century Indian master within the Madhyamaka tradition.|Eighth-century Indian master within the Madhyamaka tradition. 
ཞི-བའི-བླ-མ	 In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja, this name appears twice, perhaps in error.|In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja, this name appears twice, perhaps in error. 
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-སྣ-བདུན-གྱི-པད-མ-ལ-གོམ-པས-འགྲོ-བ	 The name of Rāhula when he becomes a buddha.|The name of Rāhula when he becomes a buddha. 
རི-དགས-ཨེ-ནེ-ཡ	 Śarabha Aiṇeya, the king of ungulates, is a mythical creature, alternatively represented as a spotted antelope (kṛṣṇa­sāra) or as an eight-footed antelope ({bse kha sgo}).|Śarabha Aiṇeya, the king of ungulates, is a mythical creature, alternatively represented as a spotted antelope (kṛṣṇa­sāra) or as an eight-footed antelope ({bse kha sgo}). 
ཤཱ-ར-དྭ-ཏིའི-བུ	 One of the closest disciples of the Buddha, renowned for his pure observance of discipline. Also known as Śāriputra.|One of the closest disciples of the Buddha, renowned for his pure observance of discipline. Also known as Śāriputra. 
ཤ-ར-དབ༹-ཏིའི-བུ	 Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni, sometimes contracted as Śāriputra.|Name of an elder and senior disciple of Buddha Śākyamuni, sometimes contracted as Śāriputra. 
དབྱངས-ཅན	 Goddess of learning; one of the eight great yakṣiṇīs who form the retinue of Vasudharā. | Literally, “The Melodious One.” The goddess of eloquence and learning.| Literally, “The Melodious One.” The goddess of eloquence and learning. |Goddess of learning; one of the eight great yakṣiṇīs who form the retinue of Vasudharā. 
དབྱངས-ཅན-མ	 Goddess of learning; she is visualized as part of the Perfection of Wisdom practice. | The goddess of music and eloquence. The Sanskrit name means “she who has flow,” or “she who has a body of water.” She was originally the personification of the Punjab river of that name.| The goddess of music and eloquence. The Sanskrit name means “she who has flow,” or “she who has a body of water.” She was originally the personification of the Punjab river of that name. |Goddess of learning; she is visualized as part of the Perfection of Wisdom practice. 
ཤཱ-རི-ཀཱ	 Māṭhara’s daughter and mother of Upatiṣya (aka Śāriputra).|Māṭhara’s daughter and mother of Upatiṣya (aka Śāriputra). 
ཤཱ-རི	 Māṭhara’s daughter and mother of Upatiṣya (aka Śāriputra).|Māṭhara’s daughter and mother of Upatiṣya (aka Śāriputra). 
ཤཱ-རིའི-པུ	 The wisest of Buddha’s disciples. Śāriputra’s father Tiṣya named him Śāriputra, “Śārikā’s Son,” to honor Śāriputra’s mother Śārikā.|The wisest of Buddha’s disciples. Śāriputra’s father Tiṣya named him Śāriputra, “Śārikā’s Son,” to honor Śāriputra’s mother Śārikā. 
ཤཱ-རི-བུ	 One of the major śrāvaka disciples, paired with Maudgalyāyana, and noted for having been praised by the Buddha as foremost of the wise; hence, the most frequent target for Vimalakīrti’s attacks on the śrāvakas and on the Hinayāna in general.\n(See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-902)|One of the major śrāvaka disciples, paired with Maudgalyāyana, and noted for having been praised by the Buddha as foremost of the wise; hence, the most frequent target for Vimalakīrti’s attacks on the śrāvakas and on the Hinayāna in general.\n(See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-902) 
ཤ-རིའི-བུ	 "The son of Śāri.” The Buddha’s principal pupil, who passed away before the Buddha. | Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. | Synonym for Śāriputra.| Synonym for Śāriputra. |"The son of Śāri.” The Buddha’s principal pupil, who passed away before the Buddha. 
ཤཱ-རིའི-བུ	 Along with Maudgalyāyana, Śāriputra was one of the two main disciples of the Buddha. Known as a great arhat, he requested some important teachings such as the Prajnāpāramitā sūtras, and is particularly famous for his discriminating insight (prajñā). | Alternative name for Śāriputra.| Alternative name for Śāriputra. | One of the Buddha's primary śrāvaka followers, known as the compiler of the Abhidharma teachings. | The Buddha’s principal pupil, who passed away before the Buddha. Also called “Śārisuta”, “Tiṣya” and “Upatiṣya.” | Śrāvaka arhat, one of the most important followers of the Buddha. |The Buddha’s principal pupil, who passed away before the Buddha. Also called “Śārisuta”, “Tiṣya” and “Upatiṣya.” 
དེད-དཔོན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
སརྦ-ཛྙཱ-དེ-བ	 According to traditional accounts, the Kashmiri abbot Sarvajñādeva was among the “one hundred” paṇḍitas invited by Trisong Deutsen (r. 755–797/800) to assist with the translation of the Buddhist scriptures into Tibetan. Sarvajñādeva assisted in the translation of more than twenty-three works, including numerous sūtras and the first translations of Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra and Nāgarjuna’s Suhṛllekha. Much of this work was likely carried out in the first years of the ninth century and may have continued into the reign of Ralpachen, who ascended the throne in 815 and died in 838 or 841 CE. (See Dotson, 2007, for a summary of the imperial chronology between Trisong Deutsen’s abdication in 797 and Ralpachen’s ascension in 815).|According to traditional accounts, the Kashmiri abbot Sarvajñādeva was among the “one hundred” paṇḍitas invited by Trisong Deutsen (r. 755–797/800) to assist with the translation of the Buddhist scriptures into Tibetan. Sarvajñādeva assisted in the translation of more than twenty-three works, including numerous sūtras and the first translations of Śāntideva’s Bodhicaryāvatāra and Nāgarjuna’s Suhṛllekha. Much of this work was likely carried out in the first years of the ninth century and may have continued into the reign of Ralpachen, who ascended the throne in 815 and died in 838 or 841 CE. (See Dotson, 2007, for a summary of the imperial chronology between Trisong Deutsen’s abdication in 797 and Ralpachen’s ascension in 815). 
དོན-ཐམས-ཅད	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
དོན-ཐམས-ཅད-གྲུབ-པ	 One of the buddhas who appear in Vimalakīrti’s house to teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka, according to the goddess.|One of the buddhas who appear in Vimalakīrti’s house to teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka, according to the goddess. 
སྤོས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-དྲི-མཆོག	 Universe of the Buddha Gandhottama­kūṭa; a universe wherein the Dharma is taught through the medium of scent. According to Lamotte, p. 319, n. 2, this universe is mentioned in the Śikṣāsamuccaya, the Laṇkāvatāra, and the Prasannapadā. However, In the Prasannapadā, this universe is said to be ruled by Samantabhadra, not Gandhottama­kūṭa (see Lamotte, p. 320, n. 3).|Universe of the Buddha Gandhottama­kūṭa; a universe wherein the Dharma is taught through the medium of scent. According to Lamotte, p. 319, n. 2, this universe is mentioned in the Śikṣāsamuccaya, the Laṇkāvatāra, and the Prasannapadā. However, In the Prasannapadā, this universe is said to be ruled by Samantabhadra, not Gandhottama­kūṭa (see Lamotte, p. 320, n. 3). 
འཇིག-རྟེན-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-འཇིགས-པ-དང-ཕམ-པ-དང-བག-ཚ-བ-རྣམ-པར-འཇོམས-པ	 A buddha in the northeastern direction.|A buddha in the northeastern direction. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-གནོད-པ-དང-སྐྱོ-བ-ལས-རབ-ཏུ-བརྒལ-བ	 A buddha in the western direction.|A buddha in the western direction. 
སྒྲིབ-པ-ཐམས-ཅད-རྣམ-པར-སེལ-བ	 A bodhisattva. | One of the eight great bodhisattvas. In particular, he has an important role in the Lotus Sūtra, in which Buddha Śākyamuni sends him to Vārāṇasī to see Avalokiteśvara. This is paralleled in the Kāraṇḍavyūha, in which he is sent to Vārāṇasī to obtain Avalokitesvara’s mahāvidyā.|A bodhisattva. 
གཟུགས-ཐམས-ཅད-སྟོན-པ	 This bodhisattva asks Vimalakīrti the whereabouts of his family, etc., thus prompting the latter’s extraordinary verses on the family and accoutrements of all bodhisattvas (Chap. 8).|This bodhisattva asks Vimalakīrti the whereabouts of his family, etc., thus prompting the latter’s extraordinary verses on the family and accoutrements of all bodhisattvas (Chap. 8). 
གཟུགས-ཐམས-ཅད-ཤིན-ཏུ-སྟོན-པ	 A world realm in the distant past.|A world realm in the distant past. 
སེམས-ཅན-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱིས-མཐོང-ན-དགའ-བ	 The name of Mahāprajāpatī when she becomes a buddha in the future. Also the name of a bodhisattva.|The name of Mahāprajāpatī when she becomes a buddha in the future. Also the name of a bodhisattva. 
སེམས-ཅན-ཐམས-ཅད-སྐྱོབ-པ	 Name of a Mahābrahmā in the eastern direction.|Name of a Mahābrahmā in the eastern direction. 
སེམས-ཅན-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱི-མདངས-འཕྲོག	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
བདེ-བ-ཐམས-ཅད-ཀྱིས-རབ-ཏུ-བརྒྱན-པ	 A universe, or buddhafield, where the bodhisattvas live in a constant state of bliss. The Skt. of the Potala MS has Sarva­sukha­pratimaṇḍita, that of the excerpt cited in the Śikṣāsamuccaya has Sarvasukhamaṇḍitā.|A universe, or buddhafield, where the bodhisattvas live in a constant state of bliss. The Skt. of the Potala MS has Sarva­sukha­pratimaṇḍita, that of the excerpt cited in the Śikṣāsamuccaya has Sarvasukhamaṇḍitā. 
ཟླ-བའི-ཏོག	 The name of Subhūti when he becomes a buddha.|The name of Subhūti when he becomes a buddha. 
བསྟན-བཅོས	 A type of Indian religious, philosophical, or scientific work whose importance lies not in its scriptural authority but in its systematic study of particular problems or techniques. | Commentarial texts on the Buddha’s teachings composed by subsequent Buddhist masters.|Commentarial texts on the Buddha’s teachings composed by subsequent Buddhist masters. 
ཁ-བརྒྱ-པ	 The sūtra contains the only known reference to a nāga king and kiṃnara king who both have this name in Sanskrit. The nāga’s name was translated into Tibetan as “hundred mouths” ({kha brgya pa}), and the kiṃnara as “hundred faces” ({bzhin brgya pa}). Other deities with the name Śatamukha appear in Indian literature.|The sūtra contains the only known reference to a nāga king and kiṃnara king who both have this name in Sanskrit. The nāga’s name was translated into Tibetan as “hundred mouths” ({kha brgya pa}), and the kiṃnara as “hundred faces” ({bzhin brgya pa}). Other deities with the name Śatamukha appear in Indian literature. 
བཞིན-བརྒྱ-པ	 The sūtra contains the only known reference to a nāga king and kiṃnara king who both have this name in Sanskrit. The nāga’s name was translated into Tibetan as “hundred mouths” ({kha brgya pa}), and the kiṃnara as “hundred faces” ({bzhin brgya pa}). Other deities with the name Śatamukha appear in Indian literature.|The sūtra contains the only known reference to a nāga king and kiṃnara king who both have this name in Sanskrit. The nāga’s name was translated into Tibetan as “hundred mouths” ({kha brgya pa}), and the kiṃnara as “hundred faces” ({bzhin brgya pa}). Other deities with the name Śatamukha appear in Indian literature. 
དམག-བརྒྱ-པ	 King of Kauśāmbī and father of Udayana.|King of Kauśāmbī and father of Udayana. 
རྟག-པར-རྒྱུན-དུ-བརྩོན	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching, who appears in no other sūtra or tantra.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching, who appears in no other sūtra or tantra. 
ལྷ-དང-མི-གང-དག-དེ-དག-གི-སྐུ-མཐོང-བ-དེ-དག-ཚིམ-པར-འགྱུར	Sixty-fifth of the eighty minor marks.
སེམས-དཔའི-དཀྱིལ-ཀྲུང	Sitting posture when the right shank is placed on top of the left shank; there is also a standing version of this posture.
རྫུབས-པ	Someone who knows little apart from the one thing he knows extremely well, as in an “idiot savant.”
རྐང-ཤུ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
རྒྱས-བཏབ	Having a particular deity at the top of one’s head.
རྒྱལ-པོའི-ཕྱག-རྒྱ	 Name of the thirteenth meditative stability.|Name of the thirteenth meditative stability. 
ནང-དུ-ཡང-དག-འཇོག	This term can mean both physical seclusion and a meditative state of withdrawal.
དཔེ-བྱེད	The eighty secondary physical characteristics of a “great being,” a mahāpuruṣa, which every buddha possesses. They include such details as the redness of the fingernails and the blackness of the hair.
གླེགས-བུ	Monks’ robes are to be sewn into large sections from small patches of cloth rather than bolts of cloth.\nsections
མཁོས-སུ-འབེབས-པ	As in to secure one’s goods to a pack animal.
རྒྱལ-པོ-ལས-གཞོན-ནུའི-ཡོངས-སུ-སྤང-བ-ཐོབ	A stylized way to say that a person or group may govern itself and is not subject to the “law of the land.” The Buddhist saṅgha enjoyed such autonomy. The analogy means the king granted sovereignty to the saṅgha, which was then allowed to govern itself and was not subject to the law of the land. The legal exemption members of the saṅgha enjoyed made it an attractive sanctuary for those on the run from their masters, debt collectors, and the law, who would join the saṅgha for legal rather than spiritual reasons. “From ancient times the legal tradition recognized the right of properly constituted groups to formulate their own laws” (Olivelle, 1993, 209).
ས-བོན	Seed of a plant; the syllable from which a deity manifests.
མེར-འཇུག	 See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-636.|See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-636. 
རང-བྱུང-གི-བསྙེན-པར-རྫོགས-པ	 The Buddha’s ordination as a monk was a self-ordination, not presided over by a preceptor or following one of the ritual procedures that were later adopted by the tradition.|The Buddha’s ordination as a monk was a self-ordination, not presided over by a preceptor or following one of the ritual procedures that were later adopted by the tradition. 
རང-བྱུན	 The Buddha’s ordination as a monk was a self-ordination, not presided over by a preceptor or following one of the ritual procedures that were later adopted by the tradition.|The Buddha’s ordination as a monk was a self-ordination, not presided over by a preceptor or following one of the ritual procedures that were later adopted by the tradition. 
སློབ-དཔོན-དཔེ-མཁྱུད	Lit. “The tight fist of the [bad] teacher.”
ཤུ-ཀྲ	 The word śukra may also refer to the female sexual fluid.|The word śukra may also refer to the female sexual fluid. 
ཁུ-བ	 The word śukra may also refer to the female sexual fluid.|The word śukra may also refer to the female sexual fluid. 
སྡེ-འདོད	 The village where the village headman’s daughters, Nandā and Nandabalā (elsewhere known as Sujata and her sister) nursed Siddhārtha Gautama after his six years of austerities and where he later convinced them of the Truths.|The village where the village headman’s daughters, Nandā and Nandabalā (elsewhere known as Sujata and her sister) nursed Siddhārtha Gautama after his six years of austerities and where he later convinced them of the Truths. 
ཆེས-རྒན-པ	 An exemplar is one who has one or another of the twenty-one sets of five qualities given in “The Chapter on Going Forth.”|An exemplar is one who has one or another of the twenty-one sets of five qualities given in “The Chapter on Going Forth.” 
སྒྲའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Eighth of the twelve sense fields.|Eighth of the twelve sense fields. 
དྲིའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Ninth of the twelve sense fields.|Ninth of the twelve sense fields. 
ཟིལ-གྱིས-གནོན-པའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 See “eight sense fields of mastery.”\nsense fields of mastery| See “eight sense fields of mastery.”\nsense fields of mastery |See “eight sense fields of mastery.”\nsense fields of mastery 
གཟུགས-ཀྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Seventh of the twelve sense fields.| Seventh of the twelve sense fields. |Seventh of the twelve sense fields. 
རེག-བྱའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Eleventh of the twelve sense fields.|Eleventh of the twelve sense fields. 
རོའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Tenth of the twelve sense fields.|Tenth of the twelve sense fields. 
ལྕེའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Fourth of the twelve sense fields.|Fourth of the twelve sense fields. 
རྣའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Second of the twelve sense fields.|Second of the twelve sense fields. 
སྣའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Third of the twelve sense fields.|Third of the twelve sense fields. 
མིག-གི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 First of the twelve sense fields.|First of the twelve sense fields. 
ལུས-ཀྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 Fifth of the twelve sense fields.|Fifth of the twelve sense fields. 
སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བཅུ-གཉིས	 These comprise six inner sense fields and six outer sense fields. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-148 and respective glossary entries.|These comprise six inner sense fields and six outer sense fields. See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-148 and respective glossary entries. 
སྐྱེ-མཆེད-དྲུག	 Each field comprises one of the six senses with its respective sense-consciousness and the range of objects accessible to it. | Eye, ear, nose, tongue, body, and mind. | Fifth of the twelve links of dependent origination. | The five faculties along with the mind. | The six sense organs of eyes, ears, nose, tongue, tactile sense, and mind, together with their respective objects of forms, sounds, smells, flavors, tactile objects, and mental objects. See also “sense source.”|Fifth of the twelve links of dependent origination. 
ནང-གི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-དྲུག	 The six inner sense fields, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-148, comprise (1) the sense field of the eyes, (2) the sense field of the ears, (3) the sense field of the nose, (4) the sense field of the tongue, (5) the sense field of the body, and (6) the sense field of the mental faculty. These are part of the twelve sense fields.|The six inner sense fields, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-148, comprise (1) the sense field of the eyes, (2) the sense field of the ears, (3) the sense field of the nose, (4) the sense field of the tongue, (5) the sense field of the body, and (6) the sense field of the mental faculty. These are part of the twelve sense fields. 
ཕྱིའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-དྲུག	 The six outer sense fields, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-149, comprise (1) the sense field of sights, (2) the sense field of sounds, (3) the sense field of odors, (4) the sense field of tastes, (5) the sense field of tangibles, and (6) the sense field of mental phenomena. These are part of the twelve sense fields.|The six outer sense fields, as listed in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-149, comprise (1) the sense field of sights, (2) the sense field of sounds, (3) the sense field of odors, (4) the sense field of tastes, (5) the sense field of tangibles, and (6) the sense field of mental phenomena. These are part of the twelve sense fields. 
ཟད-པར-གྱི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད-བཅུ	 The ten sense fields of total consummation, as found enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-210, comprise (1) the total consummation of the earth element, (2) the total consummation of the water element, (3) the total consummation of the fire element, (4) the total consummation of the wind element, (5) the total consummation of the space element, (6) the total consummation of blueness, (7) the total consummation of yellowness, (8) the total consummation of redness, (9) the total consummation of whiteness, and (10) the total consummation of consciousness.|The ten sense fields of total consummation, as found enumerated in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-210, comprise (1) the total consummation of the earth element, (2) the total consummation of the water element, (3) the total consummation of the fire element, (4) the total consummation of the wind element, (5) the total consummation of the space element, (6) the total consummation of blueness, (7) the total consummation of yellowness, (8) the total consummation of redness, (9) the total consummation of whiteness, and (10) the total consummation of consciousness. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-མཆོག-འཛིན	 Third of the four knots.\nmoral supremacy| Third of the four knots.\nmoral supremacy |Third of the four knots.\nmoral supremacy 
སེམས-མགུ-བ	A sense of reverence proves that a convert has rejected his old religious sentiments in favor of new ones. The term suggests humility.
ལཛྫ-ལུ	Mimosa pudica.
ལུགས-འབྱུང-དང-ལུགས-ལྡོག	The process of dependent origination as it works to bring about rebirth in saṃsāra, and as it works when deliberately reversed to bring the cycle to an end. See “twelve links of dependent origination.”
ལུགས-དང-འཐུན-པ-དང-ལུགས-དང-མི-འཐུན-པ	The process of dependent origination as it works to bring about rebirth in saṃsāra, and as it works when deliberately reversed to bring the cycle to an end. See “twelve links of dependent origination.”
ཏི-ལ-ཀ	 Sesamum indicum.|Sesamum indicum. 
ཤ-ལིང-ཙ	Achyranthes triandra.
འཆག-སར-བྱས-པ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
སེ-བཱ-ལ	 Blyxa octandra (?)|Blyxa octandra (?) 
གླུ-དབྱངས-ཀྱི-ངེས-པ-བདུན	The seven harmonious tones of the musical scale, contained in the sixty-four crafts, are (1) the [peacock-like] sixth tone (ṣaḍja, {drug ldan}); (2) the [ox-like] sage tone (ṛṣabha, {drang srong}); (3) the [goat-like] third tone (gandhāra, {sa 'dzin}); (4) the [crane-like] middle tone (madhyama, {bar ma}); (5) the [cuckoo-like] fifth tone (pancama, {lnga pa}); (6) the [horse-like] clear tone (dhaivata, {blo gsal}); and (7) the [elephant-like] base tone (niṣāda, {'khor nyan}).\nOn all these and related matters, see Jamgon Kongtrul TOK Book 6, Pt.1: 311–315.
རིན-པོ-ཆེ-སྣ-བདུན	 The list of seven precious materials vary. Either they are: gold, silver, turquoise, coral, pearl, emerald, and sapphire; or else they are: ruby, sapphire, beryl, emerald, diamond, pearls, and coral.|When associated with the seven heavenly bodies, and therefore the seven days of the week, they are: ruby for the sun, moonstone or pearl for the moon, coral for Mars, emerald for Mercury, yellow sapphire for Jupiter, diamond for Venus, and blue sapphire for Saturn. There are variant lists not associated with the heavenly bodies but retaining the number seven, which include gold, silver, and so on. 
རིན-ཆེན-སྣ-བདུན	 The list of seven precious materials vary. Either they are: gold, silver, turquoise, coral, pearl, emerald, and sapphire; or else they are: ruby, sapphire, beryl, emerald, diamond, pearls, and coral. | The seven precious things in this context‌ comprise the seven precious metals and stones, namely, gold, silver, turquoise, coral, pearl, emerald, and sapphire. More generally‌, they may also comprise the symbols of royal dominion, namely, the wheel, gem, queen, minister, elephant, general, and horse. See Dudjom Rinpoche (1991), vol. 2, p. 156.|In this sūtra they are specified to be gold, silver, beryl, white coral, emerald, red pearl, and chrysoberyl. When associated with the seven heavenly bodies, and therefore the seven days of the week, they are the seven jewels: ruby for the sun; moonstone or pearl for the moon; coral for Mars; emerald for Mercury; yellow sapphire for Jupiter; diamond for Venus; and blue sapphire for Saturn. An alternative list is: gold, silver, beryl, crystal, coral, emerald, and white coral. 
བདུན-མཐོ-བ	Fifteenth of the thirty-two major marks, including the backs of the legs, backs of the arms, shoulders, and neck.
ཡན-ལག-བདུན-པ	A set of practices found in many textual forms for recitation, often daily. The seven limbs are paying homage to the buddhas, presenting them with offerings, disclosing one’s negative deeds, rejoicing in the positive deeds of all beings, requesting the Dharma, supplicating the enlightened ones to remain with us, and dedicating all virtues to the benefit of sentient beings.
འདོད-པས-ལོག-པར-གཡེམ-པ	Third of the ten non-virtuous actions.
ཚེམས-མཆེ-བ-རྣོ-བ-དང-ལྡན-པ	Forty-seventh of the eighty minor marks.
ཡོལ-ཁང	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཨོད-བྱེད-པ	The third bodhisattva bhūmi.
རས-བལ	karpāsa (rendered here “shrub cotton”) and Tūla (rendered here as “tree cotton”) are both kinds of cotton, perhaps overlapping as is translated into Tibetan as {ras bal} in some texts. Our rendering is based on the Tibetans’ choice of the term {shing bal} and the existence of a number of species of Gossypium, among which are the diploid, Asian G. arboreum and G. herbaceum (cf Monier Williams); Negi’s Tibetan-Sanskrit dictionary also mentions five kinds of tūla, at least some of which are trees. Other possible distinctions might be between annual and perennial plants, or varieties grown in different regions.\nSee note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-274.
གྲུབ-པ	 Someone who has attained supernatural powers.|Someone who has attained supernatural powers. 
གྲུབ-ཐོབ	 An accomplished being; a class of semidivine beings.|An accomplished being; a class of semidivine beings. 
དཔའ-བོ-གཅིག-པུ-གྲུབ-པ	 Emanation of Mañjuśrī; the title deity of the SEV. He is visualized in the rituals of the 41st and 46th mantras of the SEV.|Emanation of Mañjuśrī; the title deity of the SEV. He is visualized in the rituals of the 41st and 46th mantras of the SEV. 
གཙུག-གཏོར-ཅན	 One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. | The second of the seven buddhas of the past.| The second of the seven buddhas of the past. |One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. 
གཙུག-ཏོར-ཅན	 A deity in Brahmā’s paradise. Also the name of a past buddha. Also the name of a Mahābrahmā in the upward direction at the time of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. | Bodhisattva. | Second of the seven buddhas of the past.| Second of the seven buddhas of the past. | The second of the “seven previous buddhas.” |The second of the “seven previous buddhas.” 
གཙུག-ཕུད-ཅན	 A deity in Brahmā’s paradise. Also the name of a past buddha. Also the name of a Mahābrahmā in the upward direction at the time of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū.| A deity in Brahmā’s paradise. Also the name of a past buddha. Also the name of a Mahābrahmā in the upward direction at the time of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. | “Crown Ornament Holder.” |“Crown Ornament Holder.” 
གཙུག-ལྡན	 The second of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh. The Tibetan translation could also be read as “one with a crown protuberance.”|The second of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh. The Tibetan translation could also be read as “one with a crown protuberance.” 
བསླབ-པ-ཀུན-ལས-བཏུས-པ	 The “Compendium of Precepts,” in which Śāntideva collects pertinent quotes from the Mahāyāna sūtras and presents them according to a pattern suited for systematic practice. The quotations he included from the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa were the only extant remnants of the original Sanskrit of the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa until the discovery of a Sanskrit text in the Potala Palace in 2002.|The “Compendium of Precepts,” in which Śāntideva collects pertinent quotes from the Mahāyāna sūtras and presents them according to a pattern suited for systematic practice. The quotations he included from the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa were the only extant remnants of the original Sanskrit of the Vimalakīrtinirdeśa until the discovery of a Sanskrit text in the Potala Palace in 2002. 
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 “Banner of Discipline;” the name of the person who sponsored the writing of the manuscript of the JAA.|“Banner of Discipline;” the name of the person who sponsored the writing of the manuscript of the JAA. 
དར	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཤལ-མ-ལ	 Salmalia malabarica.|Salmalia malabarica. 
སེང-གེ	 A past and future buddha. | Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | The bodhisattva who will become sixth buddha of the fortunate eon. |A past and future buddha. 
སེང-གེའི-ཟླ-བ	 Bhikṣunī pupil of the Buddha, who is only known from this sūtra.|Bhikṣunī pupil of the Buddha, who is only known from this sūtra. 
སེང-གེ-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 A buddha in the distant past when Śākyamuni was Prince Mati.|A buddha in the distant past when Śākyamuni was Prince Mati. 
སེང-གེའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 A buddha in the southeastern direction.|A buddha in the southeastern direction. 
སེང-གེའི-སྒྲ	 A buddha in the southeastern direction.| A buddha in the southeastern direction. | One of the buddhas who teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka on certain occasions in Vimalakīrti’s house. |One of the buddhas who teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka on certain occasions in Vimalakīrti’s house. 
སིང-གྷ-ལ	 Sri Laṅka, formerly Ceylon. The Rāmāyaṇa epic specified that Laṅka is inhabited by rākṣasas. Siṃhala was the name by which Laṅka was referred to in the Mahābhārata. The indigenous Buddhist population and their language is still called Singhalese.|Sri Laṅka, formerly Ceylon. The Rāmāyaṇa epic specified that Laṅka is inhabited by rākṣasas. Siṃhala was the name by which Laṅka was referred to in the Mahābhārata. The indigenous Buddhist population and their language is still called Singhalese. 
སེང-གེ-བསྒྲགས-པ	 One of the buddhas who teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka on certain occasions in Vimalakīrti’s house.|One of the buddhas who teach the Tathāgata­guhyaka on certain occasions in Vimalakīrti’s house. 
བཀོད-པ-གཅིག-པ	Name of the eighty-second meditative stability.
གཅིག-བརྗོད-པ	See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1140.
དཔལ-གྱི-སྟོབས	 A king in the distant past.|A king in the distant past. 
ཤིར-ཤ	 Acacia sirissa (Monier-Williams).|Acacia sirissa (Monier-Williams). 
སིཏ	 In Indian culture, the sound expressive of sexual excitement or pleasure.|In Indian culture, the sound expressive of sexual excitement or pleasure. 
སི-ཏ	 Unidentified river. Tibetan texts refer to the source of the Indus by this name.|Unidentified river. Tibetan texts refer to the source of the Indus by this name. 
ཆུ-གྲང-བ	 This name for a hell, “cold water,” only appears in the Kāraṇḍavyūha.|This name for a hell, “cold water,” only appears in the Kāraṇḍavyūha. 
སི-ཏུ-པཎ-ཆེན	Tibetan polymath, founder of dPal spungs Monastery (1700–1774).
འགྲོ-བ-དྲུག	The possible six types of rebirth in any of the six realms of cyclic existence.
རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ-དྲུག	 Remembrance of the Buddha, the Dharma, the Saṅgha, relinquishing, discipline, and the gods.| These are six things to keep in mind: the Buddha, the Dharma, the Saṅgha, morality (śīla), generosity (tyāga), and deities (devatā). |See http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-41. 
མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ-དྲུག	Six modes of clairvoyant cognition.
ཡི-གེ-དྲུག-པའི-རིག-སྔགས	 See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.”|See “six-syllable mahāvidyā.” 
སྒྱུ-རྩལ-དྲུག-ཅུ-རྩ-བཞི	The sixty-four crafts, as enumerated in the Mahā­vyutpatti, comprise the thirty designated arts, the eighteen requisites of musical performance, the seven harmonious tones of the musical scale, and the nine dramatic moods.\nSee note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2129.
ཐབས-ལ-མཁས-པ	skilled in means
ཕྲ-མ	Fifth of the ten non-virtuous actions.
ཤློ-ཀ	 The term usually refers to a unit of metrical verse, most commonly in Sanskrit literature a couplet of two sixteen-syllable lines (pāda) each of which can be subdivided into two half-lines of eight syllables. In the Tibetan translations a śloka is usually rendered as a four-line verse. However, the term is also used (especially in catalogues of canonical works) as a unit measuring the length of texts written in prose or in a mixture of prose and verse, in which case it simply measures thirty-two syllables. The titles of the principal Prajñā­pāramitā sūtras, most of which are written in prose, identify them by including mention of their length in ślokas, usually translated in English as “in nnn lines.” The original titles, even in their long form, include only the number itself, and that this refers to the length in ślokas is by convention inferred.|The term usually refers to a unit of metrical verse, most commonly in Sanskrit literature a couplet of two sixteen-syllable lines (pāda) each of which can be subdivided into two half-lines of eight syllables. In the Tibetan translations a śloka is usually rendered as a four-line verse. However, the term is also used (especially in catalogues of canonical works) as a unit measuring the length of texts written in prose or in a mixture of prose and verse, in which case it simply measures thirty-two syllables. The titles of the principal Prajñā­pāramitā sūtras, most of which are written in prose, identify them by including mention of their length in ślokas, usually translated in English as “in nnn lines.” The original titles, even in their long form, include only the number itself, and that this refers to the length in ślokas is by convention inferred. 
དྲན-པ-མ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Mahāsarasvatī. 
ཁྲུས-བྱེད-པ	 A brahmin priest who has completed his apprenticeship, and undergone a ritual ablution to mark his graduation.|A brahmin priest who has completed his apprenticeship, and undergone a ritual ablution to mark his graduation. 
རང-བཞིན-དུ-གནས-པ	An adjective applied to a monk who observes his vows or to a person who is sound of mind.
ཐུག-པ	An acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཡུལ-ལྷོ	A region centered on the capital city at Suvarṇagiri.\nSouth
རྡོ-རྗེ-དབྱིངས-ལས-རྒྱལ-བ	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.| A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. |A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
ནམ-མཁའ-མཐ-ཡས-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	 First of the four formless absorptions.|First of the four formless absorptions. 
གསོང-པོར-གསུང-བ	Thirty-eighth of the eighty minor marks.
ཅི-ཡང-མེད-པའི-སྐྱེ-མཆེད	Third of the four formless absorptions.
མན-ཛུ-ཥ-ཀ	Lycoris albiflora. These flowers are both white and red and are said to also grow in the deva realms.
མ-ཉྫུ-ཥ-ཀ	Lycoris albiflora. These flowers are both white and red and are said to also grow in the deva realms.
མན-ཛུ-ཥ-ཀ-ཆེན-པོ	Lycoris albiflora. These flowers are both white and red and are said to also grow in the deva realms.
མ-ཉྫུ-ཥ-ཀ-ཆེན-པོ	Lycoris albiflora. These flowers are both white and red and are said to also grow in the deva realms.
གོལ-ལ	Hedychium spicatum.
ཐུར-མ	A wood splint four-finger widths tall used as a sundial to mark the time in ordination ceremonies.
འབུ-གསུག	 Tib. is unrecorded in Negi. Skt. spṛkkā might possibly be Trigonella corniculata (McHugh, 2008, p 180, n30).|Tib. is unrecorded in Negi. Skt. spṛkkā might possibly be Trigonella corniculata (McHugh, 2008, p 180, n30). 
འབྲུ-གསུག	 Tib. is unrecorded in Negi. Skt. spṛkkā might possibly be Trigonella corniculata (McHugh, 2008, p 180, n30).|Tib. is unrecorded in Negi. Skt. spṛkkā might possibly be Trigonella corniculata (McHugh, 2008, p 180, n30). 
དགེ-ཚུལ	 A renunciant who lives his life as a mendicant. More specifically within the monastic tradition it can also mean a novice monk, who in the Tibetan Mūlasarvāstivāda monastic tradition takes thirty-six vows.|A renunciant who lives his life as a mendicant. More specifically within the monastic tradition it can also mean a novice monk, who in the Tibetan Mūlasarvāstivāda monastic tradition takes thirty-six vows. 
དགེ-ཚུལ-མ	 Within the Buddhist tradition it means a novice nun who in the Tibetan Mūlasarvāstivāda monastic tradition takes thirty-six vows.|Within the Buddhist tradition it means a novice nun who in the Tibetan Mūlasarvāstivāda monastic tradition takes thirty-six vows. 
ཉན-ཐོས-ཀྱི-ཐེག-པ	 The vehicle comprising the teaching of the śrāvakas. | The way or vehicle of the śrāvaka.| The way or vehicle of the śrāvaka. |The vehicle comprising the teaching of the śrāvakas. 
མཉན-ཡོད	 Ancient city of northern India. | Capital city of the kingdom of Kosala, ruled by one of the Buddha’s royal patrons, king Prasenajit, where the Buddha often dwelt in the Jetavana grove, site of many Mahāyāna sūtras. | During the life of the Buddha, Śrāvastī was a major city in the kingdom of Kosala, in present day Uttar Pradesh. | The capital city of Kosala where Buddha lived in the later years of his life.| The capital city of Kosala where Buddha lived in the later years of his life. |During the life of the Buddha, Śrāvastī was a major city in the kingdom of Kosala, in present day Uttar Pradesh. 
མཉན-དུ-ཡོད-པ	 The capital of Kośala, a kingdom in what is now Uttar Pradesh, where Buddha Śākyamuni spent most of his life. The Tibetan translation is dubious. There are differing explanations for the name, including that it was founded by King Śrāvasta or that it was named after a rishi, Sāvattha, who lived there.|The capital of Kośala, a kingdom in what is now Uttar Pradesh, where Buddha Śākyamuni spent most of his life. The Tibetan translation is dubious. There are differing explanations for the name, including that it was founded by King Śrāvasta or that it was named after a rishi, Sāvattha, who lived there. 
བཟོ-སྦྱངས	 Mendicant (pari­vrājaka).\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1154.|Mendicant (pari­vrājaka).\nSee also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1154. 
དཔལ	 Literally, “The Glorious One.” Name of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune and beauty.|Literally, “The Glorious One.” Name of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune and beauty. 
ལྷ-མོ-ཆེན-མོ-དཔལ	 “Glorious Great Goddess.” This is also a widespread name in Hindu contexts; it is, for example, an epithet of Śiva’s consort.| “Glorious Great Goddess.” This is also a widespread name in Hindu contexts; it is, for example, an epithet of Śiva’s consort. |“Glorious Great Goddess.” This is also a widespread name in Hindu contexts; it is, for example, an epithet of Śiva’s consort. 
དཔལ-གྱི-སྙིང-པོ	 A bodhisattva in the distant past who was a previous life of Mañjuśrī. Also known as Varaprabha.|A bodhisattva in the distant past who was a previous life of Mañjuśrī. Also known as Varaprabha. 
དཔལ-དབྱངས	 A king in the distant past.|A king in the distant past. 
བད-ཙ	 A rishi of ancient India, said to be the author of the Nyaysūtrabhāśya and the famous Kāmasūtra.| A rishi of ancient India, said to be the author of the Nyaysūtrabhāśya and the famous Kāmasūtra. |A rishi of ancient India, said to be the author of the Nyaysūtrabhāśya and the famous Kāmasūtra. 
དཔལ-གྱི-བེའུ	 An auspicious symbol, taking the form of an endless knot, indicative of eternity.\nśrīvatsa| An auspicious symbol, taking the form of an endless knot, indicative of eternity.\nśrīvatsa | Literally “the favorite of the glorious one,” or (as translated into Tibetan) “the calf of the glorious one.” This is an auspicious mark that in Indian Buddhsim was said to be formed from a curl of hair on the breast and was depicted in a shape that resembles the fleur-de-lis. In Tibet it is usually represented as an eternal knot. It is also one of the principal attributes of Viṣṇu. |Literally “the favorite of the glorious one,” or (as translated into Tibetan) “the calf of the glorious one.” This is an auspicious mark that in Indian Buddhsim was said to be formed from a curl of hair on the breast and was depicted in a shape that resembles the fleur-de-lis. In Tibet it is usually represented as an eternal knot. It is also one of the principal attributes of Viṣṇu. 
གཙང-སྦྲ-ཅན	 Traditionally “one who is learned in the Vedas.” The Tibetan means “one who keeps pure and clean.”|Traditionally “one who is learned in the Vedas.” The Tibetan means “one who keeps pure and clean.” 
རེངས-པ	 A spirit that causes paralysis.|A spirit that causes paralysis. 
བརྟན-པ	A monk who has been ordained at least five or ten years without incurring a fault is considered stable.
དྲི-མེད	 One of the first to join the Buddha’s order of monks. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order.| One of the first to join the Buddha’s order of monks. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order. |The second bodhisattva bhūmi. 
དྲི-མ-དང-བྲལ-བ	The second bodhisattva bhūmi.
རེངས-བ-ཅན	 The period after exhalation and before the next inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath).|The period after exhalation and before the next inhalation (one of the four stages during a single breath). 
བློ-གྲོས-བརྟན-པ	 (c. fourth century). One of the important masters of the Vijñānavāda school, he wrote important commentaries on the works of Vasubandhu and Āryāsaṅga.|(c. fourth century). One of the important masters of the Vijñānavāda school, he wrote important commentaries on the works of Vasubandhu and Āryāsaṅga. 
བ-དྲ-ལི	Paederia foetida.
སྟོག-ཕོ-བྲང-བྲིས-མ	A manuscript Kangyur copied from a Bhutanese original in 1729 and kept at the Stok Palace near Leh, Ladakh. It is among the Kangyurs derived mostly from the Thempangma ({them spangs ma}) tradition.
བསྟོད-པ	 Hymn of praise.|Hymn of praise. 
རྒྱུན-ཏུ-ཞུགས-པ	The first level of the four kinds of noble person (āryapudgala, {'phags pa'i gang zag}).
ཐོས-པ	Twelfth of the eighteen fields of knowledge
ལག-བཟངས	 One of the first to join the Buddha’s order of monks. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order.|One of the first to join the Buddha’s order of monks. He followed his friend Yaśas into the Buddhist order. 
རྣམ-པར-འཇོམས-པ	Name of the forty-fifth meditative stability.
དགེ-རྒྱས	 Ninth god realm of form, meaning “most extensive virtue.”| Ninth god realm of form, meaning “most extensive virtue.” | The highest of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. |The highest of the three paradises that are the third dhyāna paradises in the form realm. 
དགེ-བ-བཀོད-པ	 A king in the distant past.| A king in the distant past. | A supreme god, or Brahmā, of another universe, who visits our universe to converse with Aniruddha about the divine eye, and is taught instead by Vimalakīrti in Chap. 3. |A supreme god, or Brahmā, of another universe, who visits our universe to converse with Aniruddha about the divine eye, and is taught instead by Vimalakīrti in Chap. 3. 
རབ-འབྱོར	 A foremost pupil of the Buddha, known for his wisdom. | Disciple noted for his profound concentration on voidness; as interlocutor of the Buddha, a major figure in the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtras. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-927. | Elder.| Elder. | One of the closest disciples of the Buddha. |Disciple noted for his profound concentration on voidness; as interlocutor of the Buddha, a major figure in the Prajñā­pāramitā­sūtras. See also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-060-005.html#UT22084-060-005-927. 
ཡུལ-ཐམས-ཅད-རབ-ཏུ-འདུལ-བ	A bodhisattva.
ཡང-དག-པར-འཕགས-པ	Name of the fifteenth meditative stability.
དེ-ཁོ-ན-ཉིད	 The nature of things; their actual state; “thatness.”| The nature of things; their actual state; “thatness.” | The ultimate nature of things, or the way things are in reality, as opposed to the way they appear to non-enlightened beings. |The ultimate nature of things, or the way things are in reality, as opposed to the way they appear to non-enlightened beings. 
དོན-ལེགས-བསམས	 The shortened form of Suvicinitārtha within verse.|The shortened form of Suvicinitārtha within verse. 
ཁབ-སྤུ	 A yakṣa usually paired with Kharakarṇa.|A yakṣa usually paired with Kharakarṇa. 
དུལ-རབ	 In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja, this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {dul rab}, and the second time as {shin tu dul}.|In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja, this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {dul rab}, and the second time as {shin tu dul}. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-དུལ	 In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja, this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {dul rab}, and the second time as {shin tu dul}.|In the list of buddhas from whom Śākyamuni received the Samādhirāja, this name appears twice, perhaps in error. Translated the first time in Tibetan as {dul rab}, and the second time as {shin tu dul}. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-མཐོང	 Fourth of the pure abodes, meaning “extreme insight.”| Fourth of the pure abodes, meaning “extreme insight.” | The second highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the second highest of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises. |The second highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the second highest of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises. 
ལེགས-པར-བྱིན	 Sudatta was a great lay patron of the Buddha and philanthropist of Śrāvastī, and is more commonly called Anāthapiṇḍada ({mgon med zas sbyin}); he known as “the foremost of donors” (Pāli; aggo dāyakānaṃ).|Sudatta was a great lay patron of the Buddha and philanthropist of Śrāvastī, and is more commonly called Anāthapiṇḍada ({mgon med zas sbyin}); he known as “the foremost of donors” (Pāli; aggo dāyakānaṃ). 
གཙང-རིས	 The five highest of the paradises that consitute the realm of form, which is above the paradises of the realm of desire in which our world is situated.|The five highest of the paradises that consitute the realm of form, which is above the paradises of the realm of desire in which our world is situated. 
འོད-ཟེར-དག-པ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཟས-གཙང	 Buddha Śākyamuni’s father.| Buddha Śākyamuni’s father. | The Buddha’s father and king of the Śākyas. |The Buddha’s father and king of the Śākyas. 
ཆོས-བཟང	 A Mahābrahmā in the southern direction at the time of Buddha Mahābhijñā­jñānābhi­bhū. Also one of the four kings of the kinnaras, present at the teaching of the sūtra. | Name of hall where the gods of the thirty-three assemble to listen to the Dharma. | The assembly hall in the center of Sudarśana, the city in the Trāyastriṃśa (“Thirty-three”) paradise, which has a central throne for Indra/Śakra and thirty-two thrones arranged to its right and left for the other thirty-two devas that make up the epnoymous thirty-three devas of Indra’s paradise. Indra’s own palace is to the north of this assembly hall. | The assembly hall of the devas on the summit of Mount Sumeru.| The assembly hall of the devas on the summit of Mount Sumeru. |The assembly hall in the center of Sudarśana, the city in the Trāyastriṃśa (“Thirty-three”) paradise, which has a central throne for Indra/Śakra and thirty-two thrones arranged to its right and left for the other thirty-two devas that make up the epnoymous thirty-three devas of Indra’s paradise. Indra’s own palace is to the north of this assembly hall. 
གྱ-ནོམ-སྣང	 The third highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the third of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises.|The third highest of the seventeen paradises in the form realm, and therefore the third of the five Śuddhāvāsika (pure abode) paradises. 
བདུག-བསྔལ	unsatisfactoriness
སྡུག-བསྔལ	The term “suffering” includes all essentially unsatisfactory experiences of life in cyclic existence, whether physical or mental. These comprise (1) the suffering of suffering, i.e., the physical sensations and mental experiences which are self-evident as suffering and toward which spontaneous feelings of aversion arise; (2) the suffering of change, i.e., all experiences which are normally recognised as pleasant and desirable, but which are nonetheless suffering in that persistent indulgence in these always results in changing attitudes of dissatisfaction and boredom; and (3) the suffering of the pervasive conditioning underlying the round of birth, aging, and death.
དང-དུ-ལེན-པའི-མཟོད-པ	 Literally, “tolerance of remaining infused [by suffering].”| Literally, “tolerance of remaining infused [by suffering].” |Literally, “tolerance of remaining infused [by suffering].” 
བདེ-གཤེགས-སེམས-པ	 Lay female pupil of the Buddha, who is only known from this sūtra.|Lay female pupil of the Buddha, who is only known from this sūtra. 
དམ-པ	A request for a favor or boon.
བདེ-བ-ཅན	 Meaning “the delightful” or “the land of delight,” the name of the buddhafield of Amitābha / Amitāyus, in the western direction from our world. | The buddha realm in which Buddha Amitābha lives. | The buddhafield of Buddha Amitābha.| The buddhafield of Buddha Amitābha. | The realm of Buddha Amitābha, described in the Sukhāvatī­vyuha Sūtra, where Avalokiteśvara first appears in the sūtras. | The realm of Buddha Amitāyus, more commonly known as Amitābha, as first described in the Sukhāvatīvyuha Sūtra. | The realm of Buddha Amitāyus, more commonly known as Amitābha, which was first described in the Sukhā­vatī­vyūha Sūtra. | “Endowed with Happiness.” |The buddha realm in which Buddha Amitābha lives. 
བདེ-བ-ཆེན	 The realm of Amitābha.|The realm of Amitābha. 
པ-བསངས	 Śukra is both the planet Venus and the guru of the asuras. In the Vaiśnavite literature, he loses an eye from his encounter with the dwarf incarnation of Viṣṇu. The Sanskrit also means “bright.”|Śukra is both the planet Venus and the guru of the asuras. In the Vaiśnavite literature, he loses an eye from his encounter with the dwarf incarnation of Viṣṇu. The Sanskrit also means “bright.” 
ཞིབ-མོ	 The younger sister of the pratyekabuddha Śūrpī and also a prior incarnation of Śāriputra.|The younger sister of the pratyekabuddha Śūrpī and also a prior incarnation of Śāriputra. 
གྷན-དྷ-ཀ	Hyperanthera moringa.
སུ-མ-ག-ད	 Unidentified river. Possibly the Son River.|Unidentified river. Possibly the Son River. 
བཟང-པོའི-བློ-གྲོས	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
བློ-གྲོས-བཟང-པོ	 Name shared by a close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha, and by a bodhisattva.|Name shared by a close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha, and by a bodhisattva. 
རིའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-རི-རབ	 The king of mountains; the axial mountain of the flat world in the exoteric cosmology.|The king of mountains; the axial mountain of the flat world in the exoteric cosmology. 
རབ-ལྷུན	 The mountain at the center of the disc of the world with the four continents around it.|The mountain at the center of the disc of the world with the four continents around it. 
རི-རབ-ལྟ-བུ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
འགུགས	To draw; to magically bring someone into one’s presence.
མཛེས-དགའ	 A bhikṣu of the Buddha’s, present at the sūtra’s teaching.| A bhikṣu of the Buddha’s, present at the sūtra’s teaching. | A half brother of Siddhārtha Gautama who asked Yaśodhara to marry him after Siddhārtha's retirement. |A half brother of Siddhārtha Gautama who asked Yaśodhara to marry him after Siddhārtha's retirement. 
རབ-འཕྲུལ	 The principal deity in the Nirmāṇarata paradise, the second highest paradise in the desire realm.|The principal deity in the Nirmāṇarata paradise, the second highest paradise in the desire realm. 
རབ-འཕྲུལ-དགའ	 The principal deity in the Nirmāṇarata paradise, the second highest paradise in the desire realm.|The principal deity in the Nirmāṇarata paradise, the second highest paradise in the desire realm. 
ས-ན	Crotalaria juncea.
ནོར-བུ-རིན-པོ-ཆེ-མེ-ཤེལ	The sunstone is supposed to give out heat when exposed to the sun.
རོ-བྲོ-བའི-མཆོག-དང-ལྡན-པ	Twenty-fourth of the thirty-two major marks.
མགོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	Supernormal cognitive powers possessed to different degrees by bodhisattvas and buddhas. The five superknowledges are clairvoyance, clairaudience, knowledge of others' minds, miraculous abilities, and knowledge of past lives; a sixth, mentioned in some lists and possessed only by fully enlightened buddhas, is knowlege of the exhaustion of outflows.
ཡོན-ཏན-ཤིན-ཏུ-གནས-པ-ནོར-བུ-བརྩེགས-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 “King Jewel Mound Full of Enduring Qualities.” The name that Mahā­sthāmprāpta will have when he becomes a tathāgata. The Sanskrit name is attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra, but in the Tibetan translation of that text it is rendered as {rab tu brtan pa yon tan nor bu brtsegs pa'i rgyal po}.|“King Jewel Mound Full of Enduring Qualities.” The name that Mahā­sthāmprāpta will have when he becomes a tathāgata. The Sanskrit name is attested in the Karuṇā­puṇḍarīka­sūtra, but in the Tibetan translation of that text it is rendered as {rab tu brtan pa yon tan nor bu brtsegs pa'i rgyal po}. 
ཆོས-མཆོག	Fourth of the four aspects of the path of preparation.
མཆོག-གི-འབྱུང-གནས	Name of the fiftieth meditative stability.
དཔའ-བས-བྱིན	 A king in the distant past.|A king in the distant past. 
སུ-རེན-དྲ-བོ-དྷི	 An Indian master who came to Tibet during the reign of King Ralpachen (r. 815–838 CE) and helped in the translation of 43 Kangyur texts.| An Indian master who came to Tibet during the reign of King Ralpachen (r. 815–838 CE) and helped in the translation of 43 Kangyur texts. | An Indian paṇḍiṭa resident in Tibet during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. |An Indian paṇḍiṭa resident in Tibet during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. 
ཞིབ-མ-མོ	 A boy in a story the Buddha tells to explain why Śāriputra is his brightest student. The pratyekabuddha brother of Sūkṣmā, a prior incarnation of Śāriputra.|A boy in a story the Buddha tells to explain why Śāriputra is his brightest student. The pratyekabuddha brother of Sūkṣmā, a prior incarnation of Śāriputra. 
གཟུགས-བཟང	 A yakṣa lord.|A yakṣa lord. 
ཉི-མའི-སྙིང-པོ	 Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. | One of “the sixteen excellent men.” |One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
ཉི-མའི-འོད	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
ཉི-མའི-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར-སྣང-བ-དམ-པའི-དཔལ	 A buddha of the southwest.|A buddha of the southwest. 
ཉི-མ-རབ-ཏུ-སྣང-བ	 A bodhisattva of the southwest.|A bodhisattva of the southwest. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-ཡང-དག-ཞུགས	 Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. | One of “the sixteen excellent men.” |One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
དེད-དཔོན-བཟང-པོ	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
མདོ	 Generally used for pithy statements, rules, and aphorisms, for the Buddha’s non-tantric teachings in general, and as one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means “teaching given in prose.” | In general Indian usage, the word for a highly condensed arrangement of verses that lends itself to memorization, serving as a basic text for a particular school of thought. In Buddhism, a scripture, in as much as it records either the direct speech of the Buddha, or the speech of someone manifestly inspired by him. | Literally meaning “a thread,” this was an ancient term for teachings that were memorized and orally transmitted in an essential form. Therefore it can mean “pithy statements,” “rules,” and “aphorisms.” In Buddhism it refers to the Buddha’s teachings, whatever their length, and in terms of the three divisions of the Buddha’s teachings, it is the category of teachings other than those on the vinaya and abhidharma. It is also used as a category to contrast with the tantra teachings, though a number of important tantras have sūtra in their title. Another very specific meaning is when it is classed as one of the nine or twelve aspects of the Dharma. In that context sūtra means “a teaching given in prose,” and as such is one aspect of what is generally called a sūtra . | Primarily within Buddhism it refers to the Buddha’s nontantric teachings in general. Literally it means “thread.” It is also used in other contexts for pithy statements, rules, and aphorisms, on which are strung a commentary and terms of the subdivisions of a sūtra into twelve aspects of the Dharma; in that case, sūtra then means only the prose part of a sūtra. | The sūtras or “discourses” are the teachings included in the three turnings of the doctrinal wheel, which Śākyamuni Buddha promulgated to his disciples as a fully ordained monk, consequent to his attainment of buddhahood.| The sūtras or “discourses” are the teachings included in the three turnings of the doctrinal wheel, which Śākyamuni Buddha promulgated to his disciples as a fully ordained monk, consequent to his attainment of buddhahood. |In general Indian usage, the word for a highly condensed arrangement of verses that lends itself to memorization, serving as a basic text for a particular school of thought. In Buddhism, a scripture, in as much as it records either the direct speech of the Buddha, or the speech of someone manifestly inspired by him. 
གསེར-གླིང	 Home of King Suvarṇapati who figures in a prophecy made by Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana’s teacher Sañjayin that convinces them of their teacher’s prescience, which in turn gives them conviction to seek out the Buddha as Sañjayin advised they should.|Home of King Suvarṇapati who figures in a prophecy made by Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana’s teacher Sañjayin that convinces them of their teacher’s prescience, which in turn gives them conviction to seek out the Buddha as Sañjayin advised they should. 
རལ-པ-གསེར-འདྲ	 A brahmin youth from Suvarṇadvīpa who brings news to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana that confirms their teacher Sañjayin’s prophecy and sparks their search for the Buddha.|A brahmin youth from Suvarṇadvīpa who brings news to Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana that confirms their teacher Sañjayin’s prophecy and sparks their search for the Buddha. 
གསེར-བདག	 A king of Suvarṇadvīpa who figures in a prophecy made by the teacher Sañjayin that convinces Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana of his prescience. This in turn gives them conviction to seek out the Buddha as Sañjayin advised they should.|A king of Suvarṇadvīpa who figures in a prophecy made by the teacher Sañjayin that convinces Śāriputra and Maudgalyāyana of his prescience. This in turn gives them conviction to seek out the Buddha as Sañjayin advised they should. 
དོན-ལེགས-པར-བསམས-པ	 A buddha in the distant past who had previously been Prince Mahākaruṇācintī, a pupil of Buddha Abhāva­samudgata. In verse he is referred to as Sucintitārtha.|A buddha in the distant past who had previously been Prince Mahākaruṇācintī, a pupil of Buddha Abhāva­samudgata. In verse he is referred to as Sucintitārtha. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-རྣམ-པར-དག-པ	 “Utterly, Completely Pure,” the name of this world when it will be the buddha realm of Pūrna Maitrāyaṇī­putra when he is Buddha Dharmaprabhāsa.|“Utterly, Completely Pure,” the name of this world when it will be the buddha realm of Pūrna Maitrāyaṇī­putra when he is Buddha Dharmaprabhāsa. 
རབ-མཚེ-མ	 The principal deity in the paradise called Yāma.|The principal deity in the paradise called Yāma. 
གྱ-ནོམ-སྣང-བ	 Third of the pure abodes, meaning “attractive.”|Third of the pure abodes, meaning “attractive.” 
སྤྱོད-པ-བརྟན-པ	 One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra.|One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra. 
རབ-ཀྱི-རྩལ-གྱིས-རྣམ-པར-གནོན-པ	 Bodhisattva.| Bodhisattva. | One of “the sixteen excellent men.” |One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
ལེགས-འོངས	 A pupil of the Buddha, originally a destitute beggar, who, in particular, accidentally drank alcohol offered by villagers after he had tamed a nāga to end a drought. This resulted in the Buddha’s adding abstention from alcohol as part of the monastic rules.| A pupil of the Buddha, originally a destitute beggar, who, in particular, accidentally drank alcohol offered by villagers after he had tamed a nāga to end a drought. This resulted in the Buddha’s adding abstention from alcohol as part of the monastic rules. | Svāgata was a pupil of the Buddha, originally a destitute beggar, who, in particular, accidentally drank alcohol offered by villagers after he had tamed a nāga to end a drought. This resulted in the Buddha’s adding abstention from alcohol as part of the monastic rules. |Svāgata was a pupil of the Buddha, originally a destitute beggar, who, in particular, accidentally drank alcohol offered by villagers after he had tamed a nāga to end a drought. This resulted in the Buddha’s adding abstention from alcohol as part of the monastic rules. 
དབྱངས-ཀྱི-ཡན-ལག	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
སྒྲ-ཡི-ཡན-ལག-དབྱངས	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
བཀྲ-ཤིས	 In later Tibetan translations, it is translated as {g.yung.drung}. In the early translations, it is {bra shis} and in the Mahāvyutpatti dictionary it is {bkra shis ldan}, while {g.yung.drung} translates nandyāvarta. It is an auspicious sign in Indian culture, and it is one of the auspicious marks on the chest of the Buddha, as well as the śrīvatsa.| In later Tibetan translations, it is translated as {g.yung.drung}. In the early translations, it is {bra shis} and in the Mahāvyutpatti dictionary it is {bkra shis ldan}, while {g.yung.drung} translates nandyāvarta. It is an auspicious sign in Indian culture, and it is one of the auspicious marks on the chest of the Buddha, as well as the śrīvatsa. |In later Tibetan translations, it is translated as {g.yung.drung}. In the early translations, it is {bra shis} and in the Mahāvyutpatti dictionary it is {bkra shis ldan}, while {g.yung.drung} translates nandyāvarta. It is an auspicious sign in Indian culture, and it is one of the auspicious marks on the chest of the Buddha, as well as the śrīvatsa. 
གཡུང-དྲུང	 An ancient Indian symbol of auspiciousness and eternity.| An ancient Indian symbol of auspiciousness and eternity. |An ancient Indian symbol of auspiciousness and eternity. 
བརྡ	Also translated as “term.”
རྒྱ-སྤོས	 Either Tabernaemontana coronaria, Ervatamia divaricata, Valeriana hardwickii, or Valeriana wallichi (McHugh 2008, p 129 n34). | The shrub Tabernaemontana coronaria from which a fragrant powder or perfume is obtained. | Valeriana wallichii. Specifically Indian valerian, also known as tagara and tagar.| Valeriana wallichii. Specifically Indian valerian, also known as tagara and tagar. |The shrub Tabernaemontana coronaria from which a fragrant powder or perfume is obtained. 
རྡུལ-མེད-ཅིང-རྡུལ-དང-བྲལ-བ-དང-ལྡན-པ	Name of the 105th meditative stability.
འཇོག-པོ	 A nāga king who is well known from his role in the Indian epic, the Mahābhārata. He dwells in the northwestern city of Taxila (Takṣaśilā), in present-day Pakistan. | A nāga king, who is well known from his role in the Indian epic the Mahābhārata. Said to dwell in the northwestern city of Taxila (Takṣaśilā), in present-day Pakistan. | One of eight mythological nāga kings.| One of eight mythological nāga kings. |A nāga king who is well known from his role in the Indian epic, the Mahābhārata. He dwells in the northwestern city of Taxila (Takṣaśilā), in present-day Pakistan. 
ཤིང-ཏ-མ-ལ	 A specific kind of mangosteen.|A specific kind of mangosteen. 
ཏ-མ-ལའི-ལོ-མ-དང-ཙན-དན-གྱི-དྲི	 Mahā­maudgalyāyana’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future.|Mahā­maudgalyāyana’s name when he becomes a buddha in the distant future. 
ཏ-མ-ལའི-འདབ-མ-དང-ཙན-དན-གྱི-དྲི-མངོན-པར-ཤེས-པ	 A buddha in the northwestern direction.|A buddha in the northwestern direction. 
བསེ-ཡབ	Tamarindus indica.
མུན-པ-མུན-ནག	 A region where the sun and moon do not shine.|A region where the sun and moon do not shine. 
རྐུ-བའི-གྲངས-སུ-གཏོགས-པ	The measure of an object’s value that makes taking it without permission an act of stealing.
རྒྱུད	 Meaning “method” in general, in Buddhism it refers to an important body of literature dealing with a great variety of techniques of advanced meditations, incorporating rituals, incantations, and visualisations, that are stamped as esoteric until a practitioner has already attained a certain stage of ethical and philosophical development.|Meaning “method” in general, in Buddhism it refers to an important body of literature dealing with a great variety of techniques of advanced meditations, incorporating rituals, incantations, and visualisations, that are stamped as esoteric until a practitioner has already attained a certain stage of ethical and philosophical development. 
བླ-ན-མེད-པའི-རྣལ-འབྱོར-གྱི-རྒྱུད	 A category of tantra that includes the so-called father tantras like the Guhya­samāja Tantra and the “mother,” or Yoginī, tantras into a single genre of tantra.| A category of tantra that includes the so-called father tantras like the Guhya­samāja Tantra and the “mother,” or Yoginī, tantras into a single genre of tantra. |A category of tantra that includes the so-called father tantras like the Guhya­samāja Tantra and the “mother,” or Yoginī, tantras into a single genre of tantra. 
ཚ	 The hell called “hot.” Traditionally the sixth of the eight hot hells.|The hell called “hot.” Traditionally the sixth of the eight hot hells. 
ཚ-བ	 The hell called “hot.” Traditionally the sixth of the eight hot hells.|The hell called “hot.” Traditionally the sixth of the eight hot hells. 
གདུང-བ	 The sixth of the hot hells. In later Tibetan translations it is “hot” ({tsha ba}).|The sixth of the hot hells. In later Tibetan translations it is “hot” ({tsha ba}). 
སྒྲོལ-མ	 Lit. “the Saviouress.”| Lit. “the Saviouress.” | The Buddhist goddess of compassion. |The Buddhist goddess of compassion. 
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པ	 A frequently used synonym for buddha, literally meaning “One Who Has Thus Gone.” The expression is interpreted in different ways, but in general it implies “one who has departed in the wake of the buddhas of the past,” or “one who has manifested the supreme enlightenment dependent on the reality that does not abide in the two extremes of existence and quiescence.”\nHere also used as a specific epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.\ntathā­gata | An epithet of the Buddha, meaning “one who has gone, reached, or had realized in that way.” | An epithet of the Buddha. | An epithet of the buddhas. | Epithet of the Buddha. | Epithet of the Buddha.\nThus-gone one, the Thus-gone| Epithet of the Buddha.\nThus-gone one, the Thus-gone | Epithet of the Buddhas.\nHere used as a specific epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni. | Lit. “Thus-gone” or “Thus-come,” (one who proceeds always in consciousness of the ultimate reality, or thatness of all things). A name of the Buddha. | Literally, “One Gone Thus;” epithet of the Buddha and general term for buddhas. | One of the Buddha’s titles. “Gata,” though literally meaning “gone,” is a past passive participle used to describe a state or condition of existence. As buddhahood is indescribable it means “one who is thus.” | “Thus gone.” An epithet of buddhas. |An epithet of the Buddha. 
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པའི-སྐུ	 “The body of the tathāgata,” which in this sūtra is a synonym for the dharmakāya.|“The body of the tathāgata,” which in this sūtra is a synonym for the dharmakāya. 
དེ-བཤིན-ཉིད	 The state in which things are; “thusness.”|The state in which things are; “thusness.” 
སྟོན-པ	Epithet of Buddha Śākyamuni.
ཆོས-འདུལ-བ	 The teachings on monastic discipline, contained in the four main sections of the vinaya canon.|The teachings on monastic discipline, contained in the four main sections of the vinaya canon. 
ཚེམས-རྩེ-མོ-མཐོ-ཞིང-རྣོ-ལ-དཀར-བ	Twenty-third of the thirty-two major marks.
གཟི-བརྗིད-ཚོགས-ཀྱི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
གཟི-བརྗིད-ཚོགས-རྒྱལ	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
ལྷ-ཁང	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཕྱོགས-བཅུ	The four cardinal directions along with the four intermediate directions, the zenith, and the nadir.
ས-བཅུ	 The ten levels, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1281, comprise (1) the level of bright insight, (2) the level of buddha nature, (3) the level of eightfold acceptance, (4) the level of insight, (5) the level of attenuated refinement, (6) the level of dispassion, (7) the level of [an arhat’s] spiritual achievement, (8) the level of the pratyekabuddhas, (9) the level of the bodhisattvas, and (10) the actual level of the genuinely perfect buddhas.\n(See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1282). | The tenfold division of the progressive levels of realization attained and obscurations removed as a bodhisattva travels the path toward buddhahood. Also called the ten grounds or levels.|The ten levels of a bodhisattva’s development into a fully enlightened buddha. 
མི-དགེ-བ-བཅུ	 These are the opposite of the ten virtues, and consist of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, harsh speech, backbiting, frivolous speech, covetousness, malice, and false views.|Killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, gossip, covetousness, ill will, and wrong views. 
མི-སློབ-པའི-ཆོས-བཅུ	 The eight practices of the eight-fold path of the noble ones as well as liberation and wisdom.|The eight practices of the eight-fold path of the noble ones as well as liberation and wisdom. 
རྗེས-སུ-དྲན-པ-བཅུ	The ten recollections, as presented in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-182, are: (1) recollection of the Buddha, (2) recollection of the Dharma, (3) recollection of the Saṅgha, (4) recollection of ethical discipline, (5) recollection of renunciation, (6) recollection of the god realms, (7) recollection of quiescence, (8) recollection of respiration, (9) recollection of physicality, and (10) recollection of death.
རྒྱལ-པོ-མདོ-བཅུ	In addition to the Five Royal Sūtras: (6) Aparimitāyur­jñāna (tshe dang ye shes dpag tu med pa’i mdo, Toh 674); for extending longevity ({tshe bsring}). (7) gos sngon can gyi gzungs, perhaps Bhagavān­nīlāmbara­dhara­vajrapāṇi­tantra (Toh 498) but possibly another of the several texts on this form of Vajrapāṇi; for protection ({srung ba}). (8) Uṣṇīṣa­sitāta­patrā (gtsug tor gdugs dkar, Toh 590-592); for averting ({zlog pa}). (9) Vasu­dhāra (nor rgyun ma, Toh 663-664); for increasing resources ({longs spyod spel ba}). (10) Ekākṣarīmātā­prajñā­pāramitā (sher phyin yi ge gcig ma, Toh 23); for the essence ({snying po}).
མི-དགེ-བའི-ལས-ཀྱི-ལམ-བཅུ	 The three unwholesome actions of the body (killing, stealing, and sexual misconduct); the four of speech (lying, divisive speech, harsh speech, and senseless speech); and the three of the mind (covetousness, ill-will, and wrong views).|These are the opposite of the ten virtues, and consist of killing, stealing, sexual misconduct, lying, harsh speech, backbiting, frivolous speech, covetousness, malice, and false views. 
དགེ-བ-བཅུ	 Abstaining from killing, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, lying, uttering divisive talk, speaking harsh words, gossiping, covetousness, ill will, and wrong views. | The ten virtuous actions are divided into three modes of excellent physical conduct, four modes of excellent verbal conduct, and three modes of excellent mental conduct.\nSee http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2260.| These are the opposite of the ten sins, i.e., refraining from engaging in activities related to the ten sins and doing the opposite. There are three physical virtues: saving lives, giving, and sexual propriety. There are four verbal virtues: truthfulness, reconciling discussions, gentle speech, and religious speech. There are three mental virtues: loving attitude, generous attitude, and right views. The whole doctrine is collectively called the “tenfold path of good action” (daśa­kuśala­karma­patha). |Abstaining from killing, taking what is not given, sexual misconduct, lying, uttering divisive talk, speaking harsh words, gossiping, covetousness, ill-will, and wrong views. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-མི-བཟད-འཇོམས	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.| A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. |A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
ཉིན-གསུམ-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མ-བྱིན-པར-ལེན-པ	Second of ten non-virtuous actions.
ཤེས-རབ-ཉམས-པ-མེད-པ	 Eleventh of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.|Eleventh of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. 
ས-བཅུ-གསུམ	Thirteen bodhisattva levels.
སུམ-ཅུ-རསྟ-གསུམ-པ	A class of gods.
གསུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-གསུམ	 Name of a class of gods in the desire realm. There is also an associated heavenly realm, the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods, which is named after these.|Name of a class of gods in the desire realm. There is also an associated heavenly realm, the Realm of the Thirty-Three Gods, which is named after these. 
དེ-བཞིན-གཤེགས-པའི-སྐྱེས-བུ-ཆེན-པོའི-མཚན-སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-གཉིས	These are the major physical marks that identify the buddha body of emanation, and which, in some sources and traditions, portend the advent of a universal monarch.\nAs well as being listed in this and other Prajñā­pāramitā sūtras (see note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-271), they are to be found detailed in the Lalita­vistara (7.98-103 and 26.145-173), Mahā­yānopadeśa, Rāṣṭra­pāla­paripṛcchā, Ratna­gotra­vibhāgottara­tantra­śāstra (3.17-25), Mahā­vastu, and in the Pali Lakkhaṇa­sutta.\nSee http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-270 and http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2379.\nthirty-two major marks of a superior man
སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-གཉིས-མཚན	The thirty-two characteristics of a great being (mahāpuruṣa; {skyes bu chen po}), including the uṣṇīṣa, or head mound, and the long tongue.
མཚན-སུམ-ཅུ-རྩ-གཉིས	The distinctive physical attributes of the Buddha. These are the “signs of a great man” (Skt. mahā­puruṣa­lakṣaṇa, Tib. {skye bu chen po'i mtshan bzang}) that following Indian tradition characterize cakravartin kings (world sovereigns) as well as buddhas. For a descriptive list, see Dharmachakra (2013), 26.145-173
ཐོན-མི-སམ-བྷོ-ཏ	 First recorded in medieval Tibetan literature as a seventh-century minister of the Tibetan King Songtsen Gampo, he is credited with the invention of the Tibetan alphabet and the composition of two much-studied grammar texts.|First recorded in medieval Tibetan literature as a seventh-century minister of the Tibetan King Songtsen Gampo, he is credited with the invention of the Tibetan alphabet and the composition of two much-studied grammar texts. 
ཐོ-ལིང	The important West Tibetan monastery founded in 996 C.E. by King Yeshé Ö ({ye shes 'od}) and the translator Rinchen Zangpo ({rin chen bzang po}).
ཅང-ཤེས-པ	Meaning “thoroughbred horse,” the term is used here and in the introductory narratives of many sūtras as a metaphor for fearlessness.
ཉམས-པའི-མ-ནིང	Someone who is impotent or has been castrated. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order.
ལུས-ལ-རྨ-མཚན-ཅན	Marked by tattoos or brands. A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
སྨད-འཆལ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
རྒྱལ-པོ-ལ-སྡིགས-པ	One of the classes of people barred from joining the renunciate order.
འཇིག-རྟེན-གསུམ-པོ	The three realms of existence, namely the desire, the form, and the formless.
སྲིད-པ-གསུམ	 The formless realm, the form realm, and the desire realm comprise the thirty-one planes of existence in Buddhist cosmology.| The formless realm, the form realm, and the desire realm comprise the thirty-one planes of existence in Buddhist cosmology. |Usually synonymous with the three realms of desire, form, and formlessness. Sometimes it means the realm of devas above, humans on the ground, and nāgas below ground. 
ཀུན-ཏུ-སྦྱོར-གསུམ	The three fetters, as found in http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1123, comprise false views about perishable composites, hesitation, and a sense of moral and ascetic supremacy. See also note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1124.
ཚ-བ-གསུམ	Black pepper, long pepper, and dry ginger.
གསུམ-རིག	Qualities of an arhat who has the three knowledges ({rig pa gsum}): knowledge of divine sight, knowledge of previous lifetimes, and knowledge of the cessation of outflows.
ལྕགས-གསུམ	The three usually are gold, silver and copper.
ཆོ-འཕྲུལ-གསུམ	The three miracles are enumerated in Kimura VI–VIII: 49 as the miracle of possessing magical abilities (ṛddhi­prāti­hārya, {rdzu 'phrul gyi cho 'phrul}), the miracle of revelation (ā­deśanā­prāti­hārya, {yongs su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul}), and the miracle of instruction (anu­śāsana­prāti­hārya, {rjes su bstan pa'i cho 'phrul}). See also Conze (1975): 476, who interprets revelation as the knowledge of others’ thoughts. Nordrang Orgyan (2008): 231 additionally lists three alternative enumerations.
དུག-གསུམ	A collective name for desire, hatred, and delusion.
དཀོན-མཆོག-གསུམ	A collective term for the Buddha, his sacred doctrine (Dharma), and the Saṅgha, which are listed separately in this glossary.
བཀར-བཏགས-གསུམ	Impermanence, suffering, and no-self. They are called in Pāli tilakkhaṇa, the “three characteristics,” a term that has no direct equivalent in the Sanskrit or Tibetan literature; in Tibetan, these three factors are usually called the “three seals of the Buddha's teaching” in parallel to the “four seals of the Buddha’s teaching,” q.v.
ཚོགས-གསུམ	The three provisions are the provisions that are definitely authentic, provisions that are definitely erroneous, and provisions that are of indefinite provenance.\nSee http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-2207.
ཁམས-གསུམ	 The realm of desire, the realm of form, and the formless realm (under which the whole universe is subsumed).| The three realms are the desire realm (kāmadhātu, {'dod khams}), form realm (rūpadhātu, {gzugs khams}) and the formless realm (ārūpyadhātu, {gzugs med khams}), i.e., the three worlds that make up saṃsāra. The first is composed of the six sorts of beings (gods, demigods, humans, animals, hungry ghosts and hell beings), whereas the latter two are only realms of gods and are thus higher, more ethereal states of saṃsāra. |The three worlds or realms of which all universes are composed: of desire (kāmadhātu), of pure matter (rūpadhātu), and the immaterial realm (ārūpyadhātu). 
རྩ-བ-གསུམ	Ginger, black pepper, and long pepper.
དྲི-མ-གསུམ	Anger, desire, and delusion.
ཡི-གེ-གསུམ	It is not clear which syllables are meant.
དུས-གསུམ	Past, present, and future.
ཐེག-པ-གསུམ	The Hearers’ Vehicle, the Pratyekabuddha Vehicle, and the Bodhisattva Vehicle.
ཟས-དཀར-གསུམ	Milk, curd, and butter.
སད-པ	Refers to the throbbing sensation in the vagina before and during orgasm; also to the throbbing of an erect penis.
ཏིཀ	 Dot painted between the eyebrows.| Dot painted between the eyebrows. |Dot painted between the eyebrows. 
ཐིག-ལེ	A mark between the eyebrows, usually made with vermillion.
མུ-སྟེགས-པ	 A person belonging to any non-Buddhist tradition in pre-Muslim India, both those Veda-based and not. The term has its origins among the Jains.| A person belonging to any non-Buddhist tradition in pre-Muslim India, both those Veda-based and not. The term has its origins among the Jains. | Any non-Buddhist tradition in pre-Muslim India, both those Veda-based and not. The term has its origins among the Jains. |Any non-Buddhist tradition in pre-Muslim India, both those Veda-based and not. The term has its origins among the Jains. 
སྐར-རྒྱལ	 Alternative name for Śāriputra, as he was born in the month of the constellation Tiṣya. He was also called Upatiṣya.| Alternative name for Śāriputra, as he was born in the month of the constellation Tiṣya. He was also called Upatiṣya. | Lokāyata philosopher from Dakṣiṇa who bested Māṭhara in debate and was offered the hand of Māṭhara’s daughter, Śārikā. Father of Upatiṣya (aka Śāriputra). |Lokāyata philosopher from Dakṣiṇa who bested Māṭhara in debate and was offered the hand of Māṭhara’s daughter, Śārikā. Father of Upatiṣya (aka Śāriputra). 
ཏ-ལ	Borassus flabelifer.
ལྗགས-དམར-བ	Forty-ninth of the eighty minor marks.
ལྗགས-སྲབ-ཅིང-ཆེ-བ	Fiftieth of the eighty minor marks.
ཞག-བདུན-པར-བཅང-བ	These medicinal tonics were called “seven-day tonics” because monks were only permitted to keep them for seven days after receiving them. They were primarily used to treat imbalances of prāṇa and include butter, ghee, oil, molasses, lotus root and the oil gained from melting the fat of fish, crocodile, rabbit, bear and pig.
ཤ-ཁོ-ཊ	Streblus asper.
རྟ-བབས	 A distinctive feature of ancient stūpa architecture, a famous example being those of the Sanchi Stūpa. A stone gateway in the surrounding railing or vedika, and usually positioned in the four directions. They evolved into the well-known freestanding torii of Japanese religious architecture.\ntoraṇas|A distinctive feature of ancient stūpa architecture, a famous example being those of the Sanchi Stūpa. A stone gateway in the surrounding railing or vedika, and usually positioned in the four directions. They evolved into the well-known freestanding torii of Japanese religious architecture.\ntoraṇas 
རོ-སྟོད-སེང-གེ-ལྟ-བུ	Sixty-ninth of the eighty minor marks.
ཀུན-ནས-དྲི-མ-མེད-པ	 Name of buddhafield of Buddha King of Many Arrangements.|The buddhafield of Immaculately Renowned King. 
འཇིག-རྟེན-གསུམ-གནོན	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. 
ཡུལ-ལས-རྒལ-བ	 Name of the seventy-first meditative stability.|Name of the seventy-first meditative stability. 
ཡེ-ཤེས-སྒྲུབ-པ	Transcendental practice, as opposed to practice at an earlier stage.
ཐམས-ཅད-ལས-འདའ-བ	Name of the seventy-eighth meditative stability.
ལྟུང-བ	Actions of body, speech, and mind that cause one to ‘fall from’ the path to awakening, and in the worst cases fall to the lower realms of existence.\ndownfall
ཤིང-བལ	For definition, see “shrub cotton”.
འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས-སྟོང-གསུམ-གྱི-སྟོང-ཆེན-པོ	A very large universe.
སྟོང-ཆེན-པོ	“The great thousand, three thousand-fold universe,” a cosmological term that signifies the entire universe.
སྟོང-སུམ-ཀྱི-སྟོང-ཆེན-པོ	“The great thousand, three thousand-fold universe,” a cosmological term that signifies the entire universe.
སྟོང-སུམ-གྱི-སྟོང-ཆེན-པོའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	This term in Abhidharma cosmology refers to 1,000³ world systems, i.e., 1,000 “dichiliocosms,” or “two thousand great thousand world realms” (dvi­sāhasra­mahā­sāhasra­loka­dhātu), which are in turn made up of 1,000 first-order world systems each with its own Mt. Meru, continents, sun, moon, as well as desire, form and formless realms, heavens of gods, etc.
ཁྲི-ལྡེ-གཙུག-བརྩན	King of Tibet (704–754 CE).
ཁྲི-སྲོང-ལྡེ-བཙན	King of Tibet. Reigned circa 742/55–798/804 CE.
ཚུལ-ཁྲིམས-རྒྱལ-བ	 One of the three translators responsible for the canonical translation of the SEV.|Prolific 11th century Tibetan translator also known as Naktso Lotsawa ({nag tsho lo tsA ba}). He was sent to India by Lhalama Yeshe-Ö ({lha bla ma ye shes 'od}), the king of Western Tibet, and his grand-nephew Changchub-Ö ({byang chub 'od}) to invite Atiśa to Tibet. 
ཙོང-ཁ-པ	 1357–1419. The founder of the Gelug tradition.|(1357-1419). One of the greatest of all Tibetan Lamas, his saintliness was evidenced in his altruistic deeds that caused a renaissance in Tibet, his enlightenment in the extraordinary subtlety and profundity of his thought, and his scholarship in the breadth and clarity of his voluminous writings. 
བྲཧྨ-དཎྜ	Clerodendrum indicum (Clerodendron siphonanthus).
སྐྲན	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination. According to Monier-Williams, this is a chronic enlargement of the spleen or any glandular enlargement.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཆོས-ཀྱི-འཁོར-ལོ-བསྐོར-བ	 This metaphor refers to the promulgation of the Buddhist teachings by the Buddha who is recognized to have promulgated three sequential “turnings of the wheel.” The association with the concept of a wheel derives from a comparison with the “wheel of sharp weapons” said to be held in the hand of a universal monarch. Within the context‌ of this comparison the sacred teachings are composed of ethical discipline (the central axis), analytic wisdom or discriminative awareness (the sharp spokes), and meditative concentration (the stabilising perimeter).|This metaphor refers to the promulgation of the Buddhist teachings by the Buddha who is recognized to have promulgated three sequential “turnings of the wheel.” The association with the concept of a wheel derives from a comparison with the “wheel of sharp weapons” said to be held in the hand of a universal monarch. Within the context‌ of this comparison the sacred teachings are composed of ethical discipline (the central axis), analytic wisdom or discriminative awareness (the sharp spokes), and meditative concentration (the stabilising perimeter). 
ལྷག-པར-གནས-པ	It is marked by the moment when the wisdom deity (jñānasattva) descends into the maṇḍala.
སྲིད-པའི-ཡན-ལག-བཅུ-གཉིས	Twelve successive parts in which to subdivide the longest possible process of dependent arising for one sentient being: ignorance, formations, consciousness, name and form, six entrances, contact, feeling, craving, clinging, becoming, birth, old age, and death.
ཚོགས-གཉིས	The accumulations of merit and wisdom.
ཉིན-གཉིས-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མཐའ-གཉིས	The extreme of permanence (of a self through many lives) and the extreme of cutting off (i.e., the cessation of consciousness after one life).
ཨུ-ཙྪ-ཊ	 This plant could not be identified.|This plant could not be identified. 
གྱེན-རྒྱུ	 One of the five vital airs, centered in the throat.|One of the five vital airs, centered in the throat. 
ཆེད-དུ-བརྗོད-པ	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means teachings that were not given in response to a request.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means teachings that were not given in response to a request.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
ཤར-བ	 Son of King Śatānīka of Kauśāmbī.|Son of King Śatānīka of Kauśāmbī. 
འཆར-ཀ	 One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct.|One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. 
ཨུ-དུམ-བ-ར	 Ficus glomerata; cluster fig.|Ficus glomerata; cluster fig. 
འཕགས-རྒྱལ	 The kingdom of King Anantanemi.|The kingdom of King Anantanemi. 
དོན-དམ-པ	 Of final truth or reality.|“Ultimate” is preferable to the usual “absolute” because it carries fewer connotations than “absolute”—which, however, when understood logically, is also correct. It is contrasted with “superficial” (vyavahāra) or “relative” (samvṛtti) to give the two types, or “levels.,” of truth. It is synonymous with ultimate reality, the uncompounded, voidness, reality, limit of reality, absolute, nirvāṇa, ultimate liberation, infinity, permanence, eternity, independence, etc. It also has the soteriological sense of “sacred” as opposed to “profane” as is conveyed by its literal rendering “supreme” (parama) “object” (artha). 
ལྷ-མོ-ཨུ-མ	 Umādevī is also known as Pārvatī. The name is of obscure origin, but can mean “splendor,” “tranquility,” or “light.” She is the consort of Śiva, also known as Maheśvara, and believed to be the rebirth of Sīta, his previous consort.|Umādevī is also known as Pārvatī. The name is of obscure origin, but can mean “splendor,” “tranquility,” or “light.” She is the consort of Śiva, also known as Maheśvara, and believed to be the rebirth of Sīta, his previous consort. 
ཀེ-ཏ-ཀ	Pandanus odoratissimus.
ཨུ-མའི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 The name that Avalokiteśvara prophecies the goddess Umādevī will have on attainment of Buddhahood.|The name that Avalokiteśvara prophecies the goddess Umādevī will have on attainment of Buddhahood. 
ཟད-མི-ཤེས-པ	Name of the forty-first meditative stability.
ལམ-གྱི-རྣམ-པ-ཤེས-པ-ཉིད	Second of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.
ལམ-གྱི-རྣམ-པ-ཤེས-པ	Second of the eight progressive sections of clear realization.
བརྗེད-པ-མེད-པ	Name of the twentieth meditative stability.
མ-འདྲེས-པ	See “eighteen unique qualities of a buddha.”
རྣམ-པ-གཅིག-ཏུ-གྱུར-པ	Name of the eighty-fourth meditative stability.
འཁོར-ལོས-སྒྱུར-བའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	The concept of the benign universal monarch or emperor who rules in accordance with the law of the sacred teachings of Buddhism is one that has permeated Buddhist literature since the time of A­śoka. Their appearance in the world is considered a unique and rare event, just as the appearance of a buddha is considered to be unique and rare.
རྣམ-པ-མེད-པ	Name of the sixty-fifth meditative stability.
མཐོང-མ	 Skt. “Advancement,” Tib. “She who has Vision.”|Skt. “Advancement,” Tib. “She who has Vision.” 
ཚོལ-བ-མེད-པ	Name of the thirty-first meditative stability.
སྤྱི-གཙུག-བལྟར-མི-མཐོང-བ	 Name of the seventh meditative stability.|Name of the seventh meditative stability. 
འཆག-སར-མ-བྱས-པ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ངེས-པར-རྒྱལ-བ	Name of the forty-fourth meditative stability.
གཡོ-བ-མེད-པ	Name of the seventieth meditative stability.
གཏན-ཕབ	 As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means the explanation of details in the teachings and is synonymous with Abhidharma.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|As one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma, it means the explanation of details in the teachings and is synonymous with Abhidharma.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
ཉེ-བའི-སྐྲ-ཅན-མ	 One of the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra; also of Arapacana.|One of the four retinue goddesses of Siddhaikavīra; also of Arapacana. 
ཉེ-དགའ	 One of eight mythological nāga kings.\nThe story of the two nāga kings Upananda and Nanda and their taming by the Buddha and Maudgalyāyana is told in the Vinayavibhaṅga (Toh 3, D vol. 6, {'dul ba}, {ja}, F.221a–224a).| One of eight mythological nāga kings.\nThe story of the two nāga kings Upananda and Nanda and their taming by the Buddha and Maudgalyāyana is told in the Vinayavibhaṅga (Toh 3, D vol. 6, {'dul ba}, {ja}, F.221a–224a). | One of the eight great nāga kings. Usually paired with the nāga king Nanda.\nAlso the name of a bhikṣu of the Buddha’s listed as being present at the sūtra’s teaching and listed along with the Buddha’s half-brother, the bhikṣu Nanda. | One of the main nāga kings, usually associated with the nāga king Nanda. | One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. |One of the notorious “group of six” monks whose antics and heavy-handed interference prompted a great many of the Buddha’s injunctions on conduct. 
དགེ-བསྙན	 A male who has taken the layperson’s vows.|A male who has taken the layperson’s vows. 
ཉེ-སྡེ	 A monk of one year whose premature taking of a ward prompted the Buddha to decree that only those who had been monks for ten years could allow going forth, grant ordination, oversee novices, serve as reliable instructors, and live independently.|A monk of one year whose premature taking of a ward prompted the Buddha to decree that only those who had been monks for ten years could allow going forth, grant ordination, oversee novices, serve as reliable instructors, and live independently. 
དགེ-བསྙན-མ	 A female who has taken the layperson’s vows.|A female who has taken the layperson’s vows. 
ཉེ-རྒྱལ	 Śāriputra’s grandfather named him Upatiṣya, “Tiṣya’s Heir,” to honor Śāriputra’s father Tiṣya.|Śāriputra’s grandfather named him Upatiṣya, “Tiṣya’s Heir,” to honor Śāriputra’s father Tiṣya. 
བླ-གོས	One of a Buddhist monk’s three robes
སྐུ-ཤིན-ཏུ-དྲང-པོར-འཁྲུངས-པ	Eighteenth of the thirty-two major marks.
སྦྲུལ-གྱི-སྙིང-པོ	 A variety of sandalwood. The name means “snake essence” because snakes were said to live in the forests of those trees because they were attracted to their scent. | One kind of Indian sandalwood (Santalum album) said to be “blue” on the inside. The name “essence of snakes” is said to come from snakes being particularly attracted to those trees.| One kind of Indian sandalwood (Santalum album) said to be “blue” on the inside. The name “essence of snakes” is said to come from snakes being particularly attracted to those trees. |A variety of sandalwood. The name means “snake essence” because snakes were said to live in the forests of those trees because they were attracted to their scent. 
མཚན-པར-རྡོལ-བ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མཛོད-སྤུ	 A curled hair or ringlet between the eyebrows that is one of the thirty-two major signs of a “great being." | A hair between the eyebrows of a buddha. One of the marks of an awakened being. | Circular tuft of hair between the eyebrows. | One of the thirty-two signs of a great being, it is a coiled white hair between the eyebrows. Literally, the Sanskrit urṇa means “wool” hair, and kośa means “treasure.”\nūrṇā| One of the thirty-two signs of a great being, it is a coiled white hair between the eyebrows. Literally, the Sanskrit urṇa means “wool” hair, and kośa means “treasure.”\nūrṇā |Circular tuft of hair between the eyebrows. 
ལྟེང-རྒྱས	 Known in Pali as Uruvela, Uruvilvā is another name for Gayā. The Buddha inspired a group of one thousand dreadlocked ascetics to join his order of monks and ordained them there. Also spelled Urubilvā.| Known in Pali as Uruvela, Uruvilvā is another name for Gayā. The Buddha inspired a group of one thousand dreadlocked ascetics to join his order of monks and ordained them there. Also spelled Urubilvā. |Known in Pali as Uruvela, Uruvilvā is another name for Gayā. The Buddha inspired a group of one thousand dreadlocked ascetics to join his order of monks and ordained them there. Also spelled Urubilvā. 
ལྟང-རྒྱས-འོད-སྲུང	 The brother of Gayākāśyapa and Nadīkāśyapa. A practitioner of fire offering at Uruvilvā (Bodhgaya), he and his five hundred pupils were converted to becoming bhikṣus of the Buddha. He and his brothers and their pupils were the third group to become followers of the Buddha after his enlightenment.|The brother of Gayākāśyapa and Nadīkāśyapa. A practitioner of fire offering at Uruvilvā (Bodhgaya), he and his five hundred pupils were converted to becoming bhikṣus of the Buddha. He and his brothers and their pupils were the third group to become followers of the Buddha after his enlightenment. 
གཙུག-ཏོར	 One of the thirty-two signs of a great being, in its simplest form it is a pointed shape to the head (like a turban), or more elaborately a dome-shaped protuberance, or even an invisible protuberance of infinite height. | One of the thirty-two signs of a great being. In its simplest form it is a pointed shape to the head (like a turban), or more elaborately a dome-shaped protuberance, or even an invisible protuberance of infinite height.| One of the thirty-two signs of a great being. In its simplest form it is a pointed shape to the head (like a turban), or more elaborately a dome-shaped protuberance, or even an invisible protuberance of infinite height. |One of the thirty-two signs of a great being, in its simplest form it is a pointed shape to the head (like a turban), or more elaborately a dome-shaped protuberance, or even an invisible protuberance of infinite height. 
ཨུད-པ-ལ	 One of the eight great nāga kings.| One of the eight great nāga kings. |Blue lotus, waterlily. 
བླ-མ	 A young brahmin whose awakening as Śākyamuni was foretold by the Buddha Kāśyapa.|A young brahmin whose awakening as Śākyamuni was foretold by the Buddha Kāśyapa. 
སྒྲ-མི-སྙན	The northern continent of the human world according to traditional Indian cosmology, characterized as “unpleasant sound.”
བླ-མའི-བློ-གྲོས	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
བློ-གྲོས-རྒྱ-ཆེན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
ཤིན-ཏུ-བརྟགས-པ-མེད-པ	Name of the seventy-ninth meditative stability.
ཡ-མ-བརླ	vacuity
རྟ-རྒོད-མའི-གདོང	 A great submarine fire in the far south-east of the ocean, which is the fire that will ultimately burn up the world. Also regarded as the entrance to the hells.|A great submarine fire in the far south-east of the ocean, which is the fire that will ultimately burn up the world. Also regarded as the entrance to the hells. 
གསུང-གི-དབང-ཕྱུག	 “Lord of Speech,” epithet of Mañjuśrī.|“Lord of Speech,” epithet of Mañjuśrī. 
ལུས-འཕགས-མ	 The queen of King Bimbisāra of Magadha and the mother of his successor, King Ajātaśatru.|The queen of King Bimbisāra of Magadha and the mother of his successor, King Ajātaśatru. 
རྣམ-པར-རྒྱལ-བ	 A great city in the world system Most Fragant.| A great city in the world system Most Fragant. | Indra’s palace on the summit of Sumeru. |Indra’s palace on the summit of Sumeru. 
རྣམ-པར-སྣང-མཛད	 Chief of one of the five families of buddhas. | One of the five buddhas; in the system followed in the CMT, he is in the eastern quarter of the maṇḍala.| One of the five buddhas; in the system followed in the CMT, he is in the eastern quarter of the maṇḍala. |Chief of one of the five families of buddhas. 
རྣམ-པར-སྣང-བའི-འོད-ཟེར-གྱིས-བརྒྱན-པ	 A buddha realm a great distance in the eastern direction.|A buddha realm a great distance in the eastern direction. 
རྣམ-པར-སྣང-བའི-འོད-ཟེར-གྱིས-བརྒྱན-པའི-རྒྱལ-མཚན	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching, who in the distant past had been Queen Vimaladatta. He is known only from this sūtra.|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching, who in the distant past had been Queen Vimaladatta. He is known only from this sūtra. 
དཔྱིད-ཟླ-འབྲིང-པོ	The month of Vaiśakha.
ཡངས-པ-ཅན	 Great city during the Buddha’s time, capital of the Licchavi republic; at present the town of Basarh, Muzaffarpur district, in Tirhut, Bihar province of India. (See Lamotte, pp. 80-83; p. 97, n. 1.). | The ancient capital of the Vṛji (q.v.) confederacy and Licchavi republic.| The ancient capital of the Vṛji (q.v.) confederacy and Licchavi republic. | The site where Buddha Śākyamuni laid down various rules of the Vinaya, gave other teachings, and, on his last visit, announced his approaching parinirvāṇa. |Great city during the Buddha’s time, capital of the Licchavi republic; at present the town of Basarh, Muzaffarpur district, in Tirhut, Bihar province of India. (See Lamotte, pp. 80-83; p. 97, n. 1.). 
བེའི-ཤམ-བཱ-ཡ	 Ancient rishi, a pupil of Vyāsa and teacher of the Taittirīyasaṃhita.|Ancient rishi, a pupil of Vyāsa and teacher of the Taittirīyasaṃhita. 
རྣམ-ཐོས-བུ	 A yakṣa.|A yakṣa. 
རྣམ-ཐོས-ཀྱི-བུ	 As one of the four mahārājas, he is the lord of the northern region of the world and the northern continent, though in early Buddhism he is the lord of the far north of India and beyond. He is also the lord of the yakṣas and a lord of wealth. | Literally, “Child of He who has Heard a Lot.” Name of one of the four great kings who rule over the four directions in the desire realm. | One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the north, presiding over the yakṣa spirits that live there.| One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the north, presiding over the yakṣa spirits that live there. |As one of the four mahārājas, he is the lord of the northern region of the world and the northern continent, though in early Buddhism he is the lord of the far north of India and beyond. He is also the lord of the yakṣas and a lord of wealth. 
མཆོག-གི-གཟུགས	 As one of the four mahārājas, he is the lord of the northern region of the world and the northern continent, though in early Buddhism he is the lord of the far north of India and beyond. He is also the lord of the yakṣas and a lord of wealth.|As one of the four mahārājas, he is the lord of the northern region of the world and the northern continent, though in early Buddhism he is the lord of the far north of India and beyond. He is also the lord of the yakṣas and a lord of wealth. 
ཐམས-ཅད-སྒྲོལ-བའི-དབྱངས-སྒྲོལ	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
ཆུ-བོ-བེའི-ཏ-ར-ནི-ཆེན-པོ	A river said to separate the living from the dead, like the River Styx. It causes great suffering to anyone who attempts to cross it.
རྡོར-རྗེ-སྡེ	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.|A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-རབ-ཏུ-འདུལ-བྱེད	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.|A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-དབྱིངས	 The experiential sphere of nonduality.|The experiential sphere of nonduality. 
རྡོ-རྗེའི-རིགས	 In this context‌, the term vajrakula denotes the retinue of the wrathful bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi.|In this context‌, the term vajrakula denotes the retinue of the wrathful bodhisattva Vajrapāṇi. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-གདུག-པ-ཀུན-འདུལ	 A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra.| A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. |A bodhisattva in the Buddha Akṣobhya's retinue in this tantra. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-སྙིང-པོས-རབ-ཏུ-འདུལ-བ	 A buddha.|A buddha. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-གཏུམ-པོ	 Lit. "Fierce Vajra."|Lit. "Fierce Vajra." 
རྡོ-རྗེའི-མངལ	 A cave inhabited by the asuras.|A cave inhabited by the asuras. 
རྡོ-རྗེའི-སྒོ	 A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body.|A pore on Avalokiteśvara’s body. 
ཡན-ལག-མེད-པའི-རྡོ-རྗེ	 The Buddhist counterpart of Kāmadeva.|The Buddhist counterpart of Kāmadeva. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-སྲེད-མེད-ཀྱི-བུ	 The Buddhist counterpart of Viṣṇu.|The Buddhist counterpart of Viṣṇu. 
ཕྱག-ན-རྡོ-རྗེ	 A bodhisattva. | An important bodhisattva, “Wielder of the Thunderbolt,” whose compassion is to manifest in a terrific form to protect the practicers of the Dharma from harmful influences. | First appeared in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens. | He first appears in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens.| He first appears in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens. | He first appears in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if they were to speak inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mahāyāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇda­vyūha Sūtra. | Wrathful aspect of Vajrasattva; the Buddhist counterpart of Indra. |First appeared in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens. 
ལག-ན-རྡོ-རྗེ	 First appeared in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens.|First appeared in Buddhist literature as the yakṣa bodyguard of the Buddha, ready at times to shatter a person’s head into a hundred pieces with his vajra if he speaks inappropriately to the Buddha. His identity as a bodhisattva did not take place until the rise of the Mantrayāna in such sūtras as the Kāraṇḍavyūha. However, although listed (paradoxically along with Avalokiteśvara) as being in the assembly that hears the teaching of this sūtra, in the sūtra itself he is grouped with the worldly spirits that Avalokiteśvara frightens. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-བདེ-བྱེད	 The Buddhist counterpart of Śiva.|The Buddhist counterpart of Śiva. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-སེམས-དཔའ	 The deity delivering the CMT.|The deity delivering the CMT. 
རྡོ-རྗེ-རྣལ-འབྱོར-མ	 A Buddhist goddess.|A Buddhist goddess. 
བཛྲི-ཎཱི	 She is visualized as part of the Perfection of Wisdom practice.|She is visualized as part of the Perfection of Wisdom practice. 
པལླ-ཀི	 A stringed instrument, a type of yazh, which is a kind of harp.\nvallakīs|A stringed instrument, a type of yazh, which is a kind of harp.\nvallakīs 
པ-ལ-ཀི	 A stringed instrument, a type of yazh, which is a kind of harp.\nvallakīs|A stringed instrument, a type of yazh, which is a kind of harp.\nvallakīs 
གྲོག-མཁར	 Ancient Indian rishi who is renowned as the author of the Rāmāyaṇa.|Ancient Indian rishi who is renowned as the author of the Rāmāyaṇa. 
བཱ-མན	 The dwarf incarnation of Viṣṇu, who deceived the king of the asuras.|The dwarf incarnation of Viṣṇu, who deceived the king of the asuras. 
བཱ༹-མ-ན	 A snake demon.|A snake demon. 
བ༹-དྷཱུ	 Can be a name of several plants and substances.|Can be a name of several plants and substances. 
ཝཱ-རཱ-ཎ-སཱི	 A holy city on the banks of the Gaṇgā in modern day Uttar Pradesh.|A holy city on the banks of the Gaṇgā in modern day Uttar Pradesh. 
བཱ-རཱ-ན-སཱི	 Also known as Benares, the oldest city of northeast India in the Gangetic plain. It was once the capital of its own small kingdom and was known by various names. It was an important religious center, as well as a major city in India, even during the time of the Buddha. The name may derive from being where the Varuna and Assi rivers flow into the Ganges.|Also known as Benares, the oldest city of northeast India in the Gangetic plain. It was once the capital of its own small kingdom and was known by various names. It was an important religious center, as well as a major city in India, even during the time of the Buddha. The name may derive from being where the Varuna and Assi rivers flow into the Ganges. 
ཁོར-མོར-འཇིགས	 Also known as Benares, the oldest city of northeast India in the Gangetic plain. It was once the capital of its own small kingdom and was known by various names. It was an important religious center, as well as a major city in India, even during the time of the Buddha. The name may derive from being where the Varuna and Assi rivers flow into the Ganges.|Also known as Benares, the oldest city of northeast India in the Gangetic plain. It was once the capital of its own small kingdom and was known by various names. It was an important religious center, as well as a major city in India, even during the time of the Buddha. The name may derive from being where the Varuna and Assi rivers flow into the Ganges. 
བཱ-རཱ-ཎ-སཱི	 City in North India where the Buddha first taught the Dharma|City in North India where the Buddha first taught the Dharma 
འོད-མཆོག	 A bodhisattva in the distant past who was a previous life of Mañjuśrī. Also known as Śrīgarbha.|A bodhisattva in the distant past who was a previous life of Mañjuśrī. Also known as Śrīgarbha. 
མེ-ཏོག-མཆོག	 A king in the distant past.|A king in the distant past. 
འཕེལ-བའི-བློ-གྲོས	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
བློ-གྲོས-འཕེལ	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
ཆུ-ལྷ	 The principal nāga king; also the god of the sea in the Vedas. In this sūtra Sāgara is an alternative name and not another nāga. | Vedic deity of the sky, water, and ocean.| Vedic deity of the sky, water, and ocean. |The principal nāga king; also the god of the sea in the Vedas. In this sūtra Sāgara is an alternative name and not another nāga. 
བ-རུ-ཎ	 In the CMT, he is the king of nāgas.|In the CMT, he is the king of nāgas. 
ཆུ-ཡི-ལྷ	 In the Vedas, Varuṇa is an important deity and in particular the deity of the sky, but in later Indian tradition only of the water and the underworld. The Tibetan does not attempt to translate his name but instead says “god of water.” The Sanskrit name has ancient pre-Sanskrit origins, and as he was originally the god of the sky is related to the root vṛ, meaning “enveloping” or “covering.” He has the same ancient origins as the ancient Greek sky deity Uranus and the Zoroastrian supreme deity Mazda.|In the Vedas, Varuṇa is an important deity and in particular the deity of the sky, but in later Indian tradition only of the water and the underworld. The Tibetan does not attempt to translate his name but instead says “god of water.” The Sanskrit name has ancient pre-Sanskrit origins, and as he was originally the god of the sky is related to the root vṛ, meaning “enveloping” or “covering.” He has the same ancient origins as the ancient Greek sky deity Uranus and the Zoroastrian supreme deity Mazda. 
ཆུས-བྱིན	 One of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
ཆུ-ལྷས-བྱིན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
ལྷའི-རྒྱལ-པོ-དབང-བྱེད	 The king of gods in the Heaven of Mastery Over Others’ Emanations.|The king of gods in the Heaven of Mastery Over Others’ Emanations. 
གནས-འཇོག	 One of the seven great rishis of ancient India, said to have composed part of the Rigveda.|One of the seven great rishis of ancient India, said to have composed part of the Rigveda. 
དབྱིག-གཉེན	 (Fourth century). The younger brother of Āryāsaṅga, he was one of the greatest scholars in Buddhist history, author of the Abhi­dharma­kośa, the most definitive work on the Abhidharma, and later of numerous important works on the Vijñānavāda philosophy.|(Fourth century). The younger brother of Āryāsaṅga, he was one of the greatest scholars in Buddhist history, author of the Abhi­dharma­kośa, the most definitive work on the Abhidharma, and later of numerous important works on the Vijñānavāda philosophy. 
བ-སུ-དྷཱ	 Goddess of the earth.|Goddess of the earth. 
ནོར-ཡོད	 Nāga king, well known in Indian mythology as being the serpent coiled around Meru that was used to churn the ocean at the origin of the world.|Nāga king, well known in Indian mythology as being the serpent coiled around Meru that was used to churn the ocean at the origin of the world. 
ནོར-རྒྱས	 One of the eight nāga kings.|One of the eight nāga kings. 
ནོར-རྒྱས-ཀྱི-བུ	 A nāga king, well known in Indian mythology as being the serpent coiled around Meru that was used to churn the ocean at the origin of the world. | One of eight mythological nāga kings.| One of eight mythological nāga kings. |A nāga king, well known in Indian mythology as being the serpent coiled around Meru that was used to churn the ocean at the origin of the world. 
འབྲས-བུ-ཞག-ལོན	 This substance has not been identified.|This substance has not been identified. 
བཽ-ཧ-རི	 A goddess invoked in a mantra.|A goddess invoked in a mantra. 
རླུང-གི-ལྷ	 The deity of the air and the wind.|The deity of the air and the wind. 
རིག-བྱེད	 Name of the ancient sacred Scriptures of Brahmanism, most famous of which is the Ṛg Veda.|Name of the ancient sacred Scriptures of Brahmanism, most famous of which is the Ṛg Veda. 
ཁ-ཁྱེར	 An architectural element similar to a pedestal.|An architectural element similar to a pedestal. 
སྤགས-པ	An acceptable form of food for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བཟང-རིས	 The king of the asuras.|The king of the asuras. 
ཐགས-བཟངས-རིས	 The king of the asuras.|The king of the asuras. 
བཙུན-པ	 A term of respect used for Buddhist monks.|A term of respect used for Buddhist monks. 
བསིལ-ཁང	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. Here, a covered area or overhang formed by crossbeams extending from a house rather than a harmyam mansion with several rooms and an open courtyard.
སྒོ-ཁང-གི-སྟེང-གི-བསིལ-ཁང	 An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.|An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual. 
ཚིག-རྩུབ-པོ	Sixth of the ten non-virtuous actions.
དཎྜ-ཨུཏྤལ	Vernonia cinerea.
ནཱ-ག-པི-ལ	Grewia hirsuta.
རོ-ལངས	 A class of spirits that haunt charnel grounds. | A harmful spirit who haunts charnel grounds and can take possession of corpses and reanimate them. | A kind of demon or evil spirit occupying a dead body; a zombie. | A spirit that can inhabit and animate dead bodies, a zombie spirit. Hence, the Tibetan means “risen corpse,” although in the context of the Kāraṇḍavyūha it refers to a disembodied spirit.| A spirit that can inhabit and animate dead bodies, a zombie spirit. Hence, the Tibetan means “risen corpse,” although in the context of the Kāraṇḍavyūha it refers to a disembodied spirit. | The term vetāḍa is a variant of vetāla, or {ro langs} in Tibetan. A class of being that occupies and animates the body of a corpse (Monier-Williams). |The term vetāḍa is a variant of vetāla, or {ro langs} in Tibetan. A class of being that occupies and animates the body of a corpse (Monier-Williams). 
རྣམ-པར-སྦྱོང-བ	 The name of the long-past eon during which the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja presided in the buddhafield Mahāvyūha.|The name of the long-past eon during which the Buddha Bhaiṣajyarāja presided in the buddhafield Mahāvyūha. 
རྒོལ-བའི-ལོངས-སྤྱོད	A prize awarded by a king to the winner of a debate. In the Vinayavastu, the prize was title to a village and its taxes.
རྒྱལ-མཚན	One of the eight auspicious symbols, often in the form of a roof-top ornament, representing the Buddha's victory over malign forces.
རྒྱལ-མཚན-གྱི-རྩེ-མོའི-ཏོག	Name of the twenty-fourth meditative stability.
རིག-འཛིན	 A race of superhuman beings with magical powers who lived high in mountains, such as the Malaya range of southwest India. Also used for humans who have gained powers through their mantras. | Literally “knowledge holder”—this term refers either to someone who has mastered the vidyā, i.e. the power of the mantra, or to a class of semidivine beings. | Popular in Indian literature as a race of superhuman beings with magical powers who lived high in the mountains, such as in the Malaya range of southwest India. The term vidyā could be interpreted as both “knowledge” and “mantra.”| Popular in Indian literature as a race of superhuman beings with magical powers who lived high in the mountains, such as in the Malaya range of southwest India. The term vidyā could be interpreted as both “knowledge” and “mantra.” | “Knowledge holder,” a being possessed of magical powers. |“Knowledge holder,” a being possessed of magical powers. 
རིག-སྔགས-འཆང	 A race of superhuman beings with magical powers who lived high in mountains, such as the Malaya range of southwest India. Also used for humans who have gained powers through their mantras.|A race of superhuman beings with magical powers who lived high in mountains, such as the Malaya range of southwest India. Also used for humans who have gained powers through their mantras. 
རིག-པ-འཛིན-པ	 A type of semi-divine being whose identiy has shifted over time and genre. In their most popular form they are spell (vidyā) wielding (dhara) beings capable of granting magical abilities to those they favor. The Buddhist tradition associated them more closely with soteriological aims, identifying them as realized beings who possess (dhara) knowledge or awareness (vidyā).|A type of semi-divine being whose identiy has shifted over time and genre. In their most popular form they are spell (vidyā) wielding (dhara) beings capable of granting magical abilities to those they favor. The Buddhist tradition associated them more closely with soteriological aims, identifying them as realized beings who possess (dhara) knowledge or awareness (vidyā). 
རིག-པའཛིན-པ	 Literally “knowledge holder”—this term refers either to someone who has mastered the vidyā, i.e. the power of the mantra, or to a class of semidivine beings.|Literally “knowledge holder”—this term refers either to someone who has mastered the vidyā, i.e. the power of the mantra, or to a class of semidivine beings. 
བི-དྱཱ-ཀ-ར-པྲ-བྷ	 According to Nyangral Nyimai Özer’s history, Ralpachen invited the Indian abbot Vidyākaraprabha to Tibet along with Jinamitra, Surendrabodhi, and Dānaśīla in the first part of the ninth century (Martin, 2002, n. 13). Vidyākaraprabha was the author of the Madhyamakanayasārasamāsaprakaraṇa, a work in the Yogācāra-Madhyamaka school pioneered by Śāntarakṣita (Ruegg, 1981, 99, n. 311), translated into Tibetan with Paltsek under the name dbu ma’i lugs kyi snying po mdor bsdus pa’i rab tu byed pa (Toh 3893, Degé Tengyur, vol. HA, folios 43b.5–50a.6). He worked with Paltsek on numerous other translations on topics as diverse as the Sphuṭārthā commentary to the Abhisamayālaṅkāra, an extract from Buddhaghoṣa’s Vimuktimārga, and the early tantra Vidyottamamahātantra (see Martin, 2006).|According to Nyangral Nyimai Özer’s history, Ralpachen invited the Indian abbot Vidyākaraprabha to Tibet along with Jinamitra, Surendrabodhi, and Dānaśīla in the first part of the ninth century (Martin, 2002, n. 13). Vidyākaraprabha was the author of the Madhyamakanayasārasamāsaprakaraṇa, a work in the Yogācāra-Madhyamaka school pioneered by Śāntarakṣita (Ruegg, 1981, 99, n. 311), translated into Tibetan with Paltsek under the name dbu ma’i lugs kyi snying po mdor bsdus pa’i rab tu byed pa (Toh 3893, Degé Tengyur, vol. HA, folios 43b.5–50a.6). He worked with Paltsek on numerous other translations on topics as diverse as the Sphuṭārthā commentary to the Abhisamayālaṅkāra, an extract from Buddhaghoṣa’s Vimuktimārga, and the early tantra Vidyottamamahātantra (see Martin, 2006). 
ལྟ-བ	 Second of the four torrents.| Second of the four torrents. |This means a mental conviction or opinion that conditions the mind and determines how it sees reality. 
མྱ-ངན-བྲལ-བ	 “Without Suffering.”|“Without Suffering.” 
བགེགས	 A class of malevolent spirits.|A class of malevolent spirits. 
བགེགས-མེད-པའི-བདག-པོ	 “Lord of obstacles,” although the Tibetan translates it as “lord of no obstacles.” One of the names of the elephant-headed deity that is the son of Śiva and Pārvatī, also known as Ganesh (Ganeśa or Gaṇapati; {tshogs kyi bdag po}).|“Lord of obstacles,” although the Tibetan translates it as “lord of no obstacles.” One of the names of the elephant-headed deity that is the son of Śiva and Pārvatī, also known as Ganesh (Ganeśa or Gaṇapati; {tshogs kyi bdag po}). 
རྩོད-པ-བཟློག-པ	 An important work of Nāgārjuna’s, in which he refuted the idea that logic was useless in attaining the correct view of ultimate reality.|An important work of Nāgārjuna’s, in which he refuted the idea that logic was useless in attaining the correct view of ultimate reality. 
རྣམ-པར-རྒྱལ-བས-རྣམ-པར-གནོན-པ	 A bodhisattva of the northeast.|A bodhisattva of the northeast. 
རྣམ-པར-ཤེས-པ-སྨྲ-བ	 The school of “Consciousness-Only” founded by Maitreya and Āryāsaṅga, which shares with the Mādhyamika most of the philosophical techniques of the Mahāyāna, while differing on the interpretation of the profound meaning of voidness, or the ultimate reality.|The school of “Consciousness-Only” founded by Maitreya and Āryāsaṅga, which shares with the Mādhyamika most of the philosophical techniques of the Mahāyāna, while differing on the interpretation of the profound meaning of voidness, or the ultimate reality. 
རད-རོད-ཅན	 A yakṣa lord.|A yakṣa lord. 
རྣམ-པར-འཕྱང-མ	 A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra.|A rākṣasī known only from this sūtra. 
དྲི-མ-མེད	 A buddha realm in the south where the daughter of the nāga king Sāgara became a buddha.| A buddha realm in the south where the daughter of the nāga king Sāgara became a buddha. | Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. |Close Śravaka disciple of the Buddha. 
དྲི-མེད-པ	 “Stainless.”|“Stainless.” 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-ཟླ-བ	 God invoked in divination and soothsaying, possibly associated with Kubera, or an epithet of Kubera.|God invoked in divination and soothsaying, possibly associated with Kubera, or an epithet of Kubera. 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པས-བྱིན-པ	 A king in the distant past. | A queen in the distant past.| A queen in the distant past. |A king in the distant past. 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-སྙིང-པོ	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-མིག	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
དྲི-མ-མེད-པའི-སྤྱན	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
སྤྱན-དང-ཡན-ལག-དྲི-མེད	 A buddha in the distant past.|A buddha in the distant past. 
དྲི-མེད-འོད	 A future buddha, who was Candraprabha in the time of Śākyamuni.|A future buddha, who was Candraprabha in the time of Śākyamuni. 
པི-ཝང	 Presently this refers to the “Indian lute,” made with two gourds, and has been translated into Tibetan as the {piwang}, the traditional Tibetan stringed instrument. The term has been used as a general term for many stringed instruments in India in the past.\nvīṇas|Presently this refers to the “Indian lute,” made with two gourds, and has been translated into Tibetan as the {piwang}, the traditional Tibetan stringed instrument. The term has been used as a general term for many stringed instruments in India in the past.\nvīṇas 
འདུལ-བ	 One of the three Piṭakas, or “Baskets,” of the Buddhist canon; the one dealing specifically with the code of the monastic disipline. | The collection of monastic rules and regulations. | The section of the Buddha’s teachings that focuses on conduct. | The vows and texts pertaining to monastic discipline.| The vows and texts pertaining to monastic discipline. |One of the three Piṭakas, or “Baskets,” of the Buddhist canon; the one dealing specifically with the code of the monastic disipline. 
འབིགས-བྱེད	 A mountain range, actually a series of mountain ranges, which extends across central India.|A mountain range, actually a series of mountain ranges, which extends across central India. 
རི-འབིགས-བྱེད	 Several ranges of mountains in west and central India, traditionally held to be the boundary between North and South India.|Several ranges of mountains in west and central India, traditionally held to be the boundary between North and South India. 
རྣམ-པར-གཟིགས-པ	 One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon.|One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. 
རྣམ-པར-གཟིགས	 First of the seven buddhas of the past. | The first of of the “seven previous buddhas.” | The first of six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni. | The first of the seven buddhas of the past. | The first of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh. The first three of the buddhas appeared in an earlier time than this present “fortunate eon.” | “Discerning One.”| “Discerning One.” |The first of of the “seven previous buddhas.” 
སངས-རྒྱས-རྣམ-གཟིགས	First of the seven buddhas of the past.
དཔས-བྱིན	 The name, in his previous lifetime as a monk, of the buddha named Jewel Moon Performing Enlightened Actions.|The name, in his previous lifetime as a monk, of the buddha named Jewel Moon Performing Enlightened Actions. 
རྡུལ-མེད-པ	 The realm of Buddha Padmaprabha.|The realm of Buddha Padmaprabha. 
དཔའ-བརྟན-པའི-སྡེ-དགའ-བའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 One of the 35 buddhas of confession.|One of the 35 buddhas of confession. 
དཔའ-བོའི-སྡེ	 A bodhisattva who only appears in passing in the Samādhirāja, and in no other sūtra.|A bodhisattva who only appears in passing in the Samādhirāja, and in no other sūtra. 
དཔའ-བོ	Closely associated with notions of virility, this term can denote the male deity of the maṇḍala (whose consort is the Vidyā) or the yogī who practices this mode of Tantra.
སྐྱེ-བུ-དམ-པ	An epithet for the Buddha. Also the ideal man, a good or wise man.
འཕགས-སྐྱེས-པོ	 A son of King Prasenajit of Kosala, who first served as a general in his father’s army, but later usurped the throne. As a boy he discovered that his mother, who had been offered to his father by the Śākyas, had originally only been a servant rather than a noblewoman as the Śākyas had claimed; and later, as king, in revenge he attacked and destroyed Kapilavastu, slaughtering most of the Śākya inhabitants. However, he then died there in a flood. Not to be confused with the Virūḍhaka who is one of the Four Great Kings. | Literally, “Noble Birth.” Name of one of the four great kings who rule over the four directions in the desire realm. | One of the four mahārājas. He is the guardian of the southern direction and the lord of the kumbhāṇḍas. | One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the south, presiding over the preta kumbhāṇḍa spirits that live there.| One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the south, presiding over the preta kumbhāṇḍa spirits that live there. |A son of King Prasenajit of Kosala, who first served as a general in his father’s army, but later usurped the throne. As a boy he discovered that his mother, who had been offered to his father by the Śākyas, had originally only been a servant rather than a noblewoman as the Śākyas had claimed; and later, as king, in revenge he attacked and destroyed Kapilavastu, slaughtering most of the Śākya inhabitants. However, he then died there in a flood. Not to be confused with the Virūḍhaka who is one of the Four Great Kings. 
མིག-མི-བཟང	 Literally, “Bad Eye.” Name of one of the four great kings, who rule over the four directions in the desire realm.| Literally, “Bad Eye.” Name of one of the four great kings, who rule over the four directions in the desire realm. | One of the four mahārājas. He is the guardian of the western direction and the lord of the nāgas. | One of the four mahārājas. He is the guardian of the western direction and traditionally the lord of the nāgas, though in this sūtra that appears to be Dhṛtarāṣṭra. | One of the “four great kings, guardians of the world,” he is held to dwell in the west, presiding over the nāga spirits that live there. |One of the four mahārājas. He is the guardian of the western direction and traditionally the lord of the nāgas, though in this sūtra that appears to be Dhṛtarāṣṭra. 
སྐར-མ-ས-ག	 The southwestern constellation symbolizing earth.|The southwestern constellation symbolizing earth. 
ཁྱད-པར-བློ-གྲོས	 One of eight prince brothers in the distant past. Also the name of one of “the sixteen excellent men.”|One of eight prince brothers in the distant past. Also the name of one of “the sixteen excellent men.” 
ཁྱབ-འཇུག	 One of the central gods in the Hindu pantheon today. He had not yet risen to an important status during the Buddha’s lifetime and only developed his own significant following in the early years of the common era. Vaishnavism developed the theory of ten emanations, or avatars, the ninth being the Buddha. His emanation as a dwarf plays an important role in this sūtra. The Sanskrit etymology of the name is uncertain, but it was already in use in the Vedas, where he is a minor deity, and has been glossed as “one who enters (everywhere).” | One of the eight great gods in the Indian pantheon.| One of the eight great gods in the Indian pantheon. | One of the principal three Hindu gods. |One of the principal three Hindu gods. 
ཡངས-ལྡན	 The realm where in the future there will be Buddha Śālendrarāja.|The realm where in the future there will be Buddha Śālendrarāja. 
ཐམས-ཅད-སྐྱོབ	 One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. | Third of the seven buddhas of the past.| Third of the seven buddhas of the past. | “Protector of All.” |One of the six buddhas who preceded Śākyamuni in this Fortunate Eon. 
ཐམས-ཅད-སྐྱོབ-པ	 The third of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh (in some texts his name is rendered {kun skyobs} in Tibetan).|The third of the seven buddhas, with Śākyamuni as the seventh (in some texts his name is rendered {kun skyobs} in Tibetan). 
ཀུན-སྐྱོབ	 Third of the seven buddhas of the past.|Third of the seven buddhas of the past. 
ཐམས-ཅད-བཤེས	 One of the early great rishis of India, who revealed part of the Vedas.|One of the early great rishis of India, who revealed part of the Vedas. 
བཱི-ཏ-རཱ-ག	 A deity invoked in a mantra to cure blindness.|A deity invoked in a mantra to cure blindness. 
ཁྱད-པར-སེམས	 A king in the distant past.|A king in the distant past. 
རྣམ-པར-སྐྱེ-བ-མ	 The {stog pho brang} Kangyur has {rnam par 'phel ma}.|The {stog pho brang} Kangyur has {rnam par 'phel ma}. 
ཕྱེ-བ	 A legendary realm in which Śiva will attain buddhahood.|A legendary realm in which Śiva will attain buddhahood. 
ཐེ-ཚོམ-ཀུན-བཅོམ	 A prince in the distant past.|A prince in the distant past. 
རྣམ-གྲོལ-སྡེ	 Indian commentator (fl. early sixth century).|Indian commentator (fl. early sixth century). 
བློ-གྲོས-ཁྱད-པར-ཅན	 Bodhisattva.|Bodhisattva. 
སྤྱོད-པ-ཁྱད-པར-ཅན	 One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra.|One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra. 
སྤྱོད-པ-རྣམ-པར-དག	 One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra.|One of the four principal bodhisattvas that emerged from the ground at the time of the teaching of the Lotus Sūtra. 
དབྱངས-ཟབ-པ	Twenty-fifth of the eighty minor marks; the additional simile comes from the Sanskrit term used in this list in other sūtras.\nvoice is deep
གསུང-དབྱངས-རྣམ-པ-དྲུག-བཅུ	See note http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-031-002.html#UT22084-031-002-1315.\nsixty aspects
གསོག	 Also translated here as “void.”|Also translated here as “voidness.” 
བཀུས-ཏེ-བོར	The medicine of first resort for monks, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
སྟོང-པ-ཉིད-ཀྱི-སྟོང-པ-ཉིད	 The voidness of voidness, an important concept that indicates the ultimate conceptuality of all terms, even those for the ultimate, to avoid the major error of absolutising the ultimate.|The voidness of voidness, an important concept that indicates the ultimate conceptuality of all terms, even those for the ultimate, to avoid the major error of absolutising the ultimate. 
སེམས-པ	In later texts, among the ever-present mental factors that underlie and constitute all conscious states; the Sarvāstivāda Abhidharma lists ten such factors (mahābhūmika, {sa chen po pa}), while Yogācāra theory identifies five (sarvatraga, {kun 'gro}). In that context, volition orients the mind towards objects in ways that may be virtuous, non-virtuous or neutral. In this sūtra, however, the term seems to denote a less specific, manifest aspect of consciousness.
གསུད-པ	Symptom of a cholera-like illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
མ-ནིང-ཕྲག-དོག-ཅན	A person who only becomes erect out of the jealousy they feel when seeing a woman having sex with another person. One of the five types of paṇḍaka, all of whom are barred from joining the renunciate order.
སྤོང-བྱེད	 One of the sixteen principal mahājanapadas (great countries) of ancient India, and a confederacy of eight or nine clans. It extended from the north bank of the Ganges opposite Pāṭaliputra up to the Madhesh regions of present southern Nepal.|One of the sixteen principal mahājanapadas (great countries) of ancient India, and a confederacy of eight or nine clans. It extended from the north bank of the Ganges opposite Pāṭaliputra up to the Madhesh regions of present southern Nepal. 
བྲི-ཛི-ན	 The land and people of Vṛji or Vaji (Pāli Vajji), a country situated on the north eastern Gangetic plain, and one of the 16 mahājanapada of Ancient India. It was run by a confederacy of eight or nine clans, including the Vṛji, Licchavi, and Videha, who sent representatives to an administrative council led by an elected ruler. Its capital was Vaiśālī. See Edgerton, s.v. Vṛji and Vaji.|The land and people of Vṛji or Vaji (Pāli Vajji), a country situated on the north eastern Gangetic plain, and one of the 16 mahājanapada of Ancient India. It was run by a confederacy of eight or nine clans, including the Vṛji, Licchavi, and Videha, who sent representatives to an administrative council led by an elected ruler. Its capital was Vaiśālī. See Edgerton, s.v. Vṛji and Vaji. 
སྦྲུལ-མ-རུངས-པ	 A class of mischievous spirits.|A class of mischievous spirits. 
ནད	 Disease or sickness; also a class of mischievous spirits.|Disease or sickness; also a class of mischievous spirits. 
ལུང-བསྟན-པ	 Prophecies. This is also specifically one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.”|Prophecies. This is also specifically one of the twelve aspects of the Dharma.\nSee also “twelve wheels of the Dharma.” 
ཁྱབ-བྱེད	 One of the five vital airs, diffused throughout the entire body.|One of the five vital airs, diffused throughout the entire body. 
བཀོད-པའི-རྒྱལ-པོ	 A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. Also present at the teaching of http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html (ting nge ’dzin gyi rgyal po’i mdo, Toh 127).|A bodhisattva present at the sūtra’s teaching. Also present at the teaching of http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-055-001.html (ting nge ’dzin gyi rgyal po’i mdo, Toh 127). 
ལྷན-ཅིག-གནས-པ	A junior monk who lives with and under the guidance of a senior monk.
དྲོད	Name of the 1st training on the path of preparation.
རིལ-བ	An implement used by brahmins for pūjā.
དྲི-མཆོག	Nymphaea stellata; Nymphaea nouchali. Day-blossoming water lilies that may be blue, white, or red.\nwater lilies
ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད-དང-ལྡན-པའི-ཆུ	The eight qualities of water: (1) sweet-tasting; (2) cool; (3) soft; (4) light; (5) transparent; (6) clean; (7) not harmful to the throat; and (8) beneficial to the stomach.
ཀ-ལམ-བི	Convolvulus repens, Ipomoea aquatica.
ཡན-ལག-བརྒྱད-ལྡན-གྱི-ཆུ	Water that has the eight qualities of being sweet, cool, pleasant, light, clear, pure, not harmful to the throat, and beneficial for the stomach.
ཆུའི-བཏག-པ	A type of ordeal to test one’s veracity.
ཟུར-ཕུ-ལྔ	Epithet of Mañjuśrī.
རིན	 Formal offering to welcome a guest consisting of water, flowers, and dūrvā grass.|Formal offering to welcome a guest consisting of water, flowers, and dūrvā grass. 
གློག-པ	Symptom that may be evidence of an illness considered an impediment to ordination.\nSee also http://read.84000.co/translation/UT22084-001-001.html#UT22084-001-001-1011.
ཕྱིར-མི-ལྡོག-པའི-འཁོར-ལོ-བསྒྲགས-པའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	 Realm of a tathāgata.|Realm of a tathāgata. 
སྡུག-པ-ཉིད-དུ-མོས-པ	Third of the eight aspects of liberation.
གཟུགས-ཅན-གཟུགས-རྣམས-ལ-ལྟ-བ	First of the eight aspects of liberation.
ཤྭེ-ཏ-གྲི-དྷྲི-ཎཱི	A female garuḍa invoked to counter the effects of poison.
སྤྱན-ཡངས-ཤིང-བའི-རྫི-མ-ལྟ-བུ	Twenty-seventh of the thirty-two major marks.
ཤ-ར-པུང-ག	Tephrosia purpurea.
མདའ-རྒྱུས	Abrus precatorius.
མ-ཧེ	Bubalus arnee. Also called Asian buffalo and Asiatic buffalo.
སྡུད-པ	Lit. “collect,” i.e., gather together into the Mahāyāna.
རླུང-ལས-གྱུར-པའི-ནད	 First of the four kinds of disease.|First of the four kinds of disease. 
མཉམ-པ-ཉིད-ཀྱི-ཡེ-ཤེས	 One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Ratnasambhava.|One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Ratnasambhava. 
སོ-སོར-རྟོག-པའི-ཡེ-ཤེས	 One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Amitābha.|One of the five wisdoms corresponding to the tathāgata Amitābha. 
འཁྲུལ-པ-མེད-པ	First of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
བསྙེལ-པ-མེད-པ	Third of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas.
སེམས-མཉམ-པར-མ-བཞག-པ-མེད-པ	Fifth or sixth of the eighteen distinct qualities of the buddhas. Also rendered here as “without unabsorbed minds.”\nwithout unabsorbed minds
སྤང-ལེབ-ཁང	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བེའུ-རས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
བལ-གོས	An acceptable form of cloth for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
རྒྱལ-པོ-ལ-གནོད-པའི-ལས-བྱེད-པ	One of the classes of people barred from joining the renunciate order.
འཇིག-རྟེན-གྱི-ཁམས	This can refer to one world with its orbiting sun and moon, and also to groups of these worlds in multiples of thousands, in particular a world relam of a thousand million worlds, which is said to be circular, with its circumference twice as long as its diameter.
མེ-ལོང-གི-དཀྱིལ-འཁོར-བསྒྲགས-པའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	Realm of a tathāgata.
རྡུལ-མེད-པའི-འཇིག-རྟེན	Realm of a tathāgata.
ཁུར-གྱིས-དུབ-པ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
ལམ-གྱིས-དུབ-པ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
བུད-མེད-ཀྱིས-དུབ-པ	A physical condition considered an impediment to ordination.
སྦྱིན-གནས	worthy of gifts
ལོག-པར-ལྟ-བ	Tenth of the ten non-virtuous actions.
གནོད-སྦྱིན	 A class of male and female spirits, depicted as holding choppers, cleavers, and swords. Inhabiting mountainous areas and sylvan groves, their name in Tibetan ({gnod sbyin}, “granting harm”) suggests a malign nature. | A class of semidivine beings said to dwell in the north, under the jurisdiction of the Great King Vaiśravaṇa, otherwise known as Kubera. | A class of spirits. | A class of supernatural beings, often represented as the attendants of Vaiśravaṇa, the god of wealth, but the term is also applied to spirits. Although they are generally portrayed as benevolent, the Tibetan translation means “harm giver,” as they are also capable of causing harm. | A class of supernatural beings, often represented as the attendants of the god of wealth, but the term is also applied to spirits. Although they are generally portrayed as benevolent, the Tibetan translation means “harm giver,” as they are also capable of causing harm. | A forest demon. | A harmful spirit; literally “harm-bringer.” | A semi-divine being. | Class of non-human beings. | Yakṣas are a class of beings who assail and cause harm to humans. One of the eight classes of spirits.| Yakṣas are a class of beings who assail and cause harm to humans. One of the eight classes of spirits. | Yakṣas or harm givers. A class of mostly malevolent spirits. |A forest demon. 
སྣོད-བྱིན	 A class of supernatural beings, often represented as the attendants of the god of wealth, but the term is also applied to spirits. Although they are generally portrayed as benevolent, the Tibetan translation means “harm giver,” as they are also capable of causing harm.|A class of supernatural beings, often represented as the attendants of the god of wealth, but the term is also applied to spirits. Although they are generally portrayed as benevolent, the Tibetan translation means “harm giver,” as they are also capable of causing harm. 
གནོད-སྦྱིན-མོ	 Female yakṣa.|Female yakṣa. 
གནོད-སྤྱིན-མོ	 A female yakṣa.|A female yakṣa. 
གཤིན-རྗེ-རྒྱལ-པོ	 The lord of death, who judges the dead and rules over the hells.\nDharmarāja Yamarāja\nKing Yama\nYamarāja\nDharmarāja Yama| The lord of death, who judges the dead and rules over the hells.\nDharmarāja Yamarāja\nKing Yama\nYamarāja\nDharmarāja Yama |The lord of death, who judges the dead and rules over the hells.\nDharmarāja Yamarāja\nKing Yama\nYamarāja\nDharmarāja Yama 
གཤིན-རྗེ-མཐར-བྱེད	 Deity invoked to summon and subdue Karṇapiśācī.|Deity invoked to summon and subdue Karṇapiśācī. 
ཡ-མཱནྟ-ཀ	 The wrathful aspect of Mañjuśrī.|The wrathful aspect of Mañjuśrī. 
ཐེག-པ	 A “way of going,” which primarily means a path or a way. It can also mean a conveyance or carriage, which definition within commentarial literature is represented in the Tibetan “carrier,” and therefore also translated into English as “vehicle.” | The Sanskrit has several meanings, including “way,” “carriage,” and “vehicle.”| The Sanskrit has several meanings, including “way,” “carriage,” and “vehicle.” |A “way of going,” which primarily means a path or a way. It can also mean a conveyance or carriage, which definition within commentarial literature is represented in the Tibetan “carrier,” and therefore also translated into English as “vehicle.” 
སབ-མོས-བསྐོར-བ	An acceptable form of shelter for a monk, as identified in the Four Resources section of the ordination ritual.
ཡར-ལུང	A valley in South Tibet.
གྲགས-པའི-འོད	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
གྲགས-འོད	 Name of a tathāgata.|Name of a tathāgata. 
གྲགས-པ	 Name of a tathāgata.| Name of a tathāgata. | The son of a wealthy merchant in Vārāṇasī. After the five excellent disciples, Yaśas was the next to go forth and receive ordination. He was followed in short order by Pūrṇa, Vimala, Gavāmpati, and Subāhu, all five together being referred to as the “five excellent companions.” |The son of a wealthy merchant in Vārāṇasī. After the five excellent disciples, Yaśas was the next to go forth and receive ordination. He was followed in short order by Pūrṇa, Vimala, Gavāmpati, and Subāhu, all five together being referred to as the “five excellent companions.” 
གྲགས-འདོད	 The name means “Desirer of Fame,” and he was so called because of his inferior motivation at that time. This is the bodhisattva in the distant past who would eventually become Maitreya.|The name means “Desirer of Fame,” and he was so called because of his inferior motivation at that time. This is the bodhisattva in the distant past who would eventually become Maitreya. 
གྲགས-འཛིན	 Buddha Śākyamuni’s wife (and the mother of his son Rāhula) who became a bhikṣunī.|Buddha Śākyamuni’s wife (and the mother of his son Rāhula) who became a bhikṣunī. 
ལྟང-བྲང-གི-ཚལ	The forest outside of Rājagṛha where King Bimbisāra, along with 80,000 gods and many hundreds of thousands of Magadhan brahmins and householders, were converted to Buddhism.
ནས-ཀྱི-གླིང	 Literally “The Barley Islands,” this refers to the land of the Greeks, whose empire at one time extended along the northern coasts of the Persian gulf as far as India.|Literally “The Barley Islands,” this refers to the land of the Greeks, whose empire at one time extended along the northern coasts of the Persian gulf as far as India. 
སེང-གེ-རྣམ-པར-བསྒྱིངས-པ	Name of the twenty-seventh meditative stability.
ཡེ-ཤེས-སྡེ	 Prolific translator and editor of a large number of sūtras, including Purification of Karmic Obscurations.| See “Nanam Yeshé Dé.” | The monk Yeshé Dé, a prolific translator of sūtras. | Tibetan translator (fl. late eighth–early ninth centuries). |A prolific Tibetan translator active during the late 8th and early 9th centuries. 
བན-དེ-ཡེ-ཤེས-སྡེ	The monk Yeshé Dé, the translator of the Sukhāvatī­vyūha­sūtra.
རྣལ-འབྱོར	 A term which is generally used to refer to a wide range of spiritual practices. It literally means to be merged with or “yoked to,” in the sense of being fully immersed in one’s respective discipline. | Literally “union” in Sanskrit; Tibetan specifies “union with the natural state.”| Literally “union” in Sanskrit; Tibetan specifies “union with the natural state.” |A term which is generally used to refer to a wide range of spiritual practices. It literally means to be merged with or “yoked to,” in the sense of being fully immersed in one’s respective discipline. 
རྣལ-འབྱོར-སྤྱོད-པ	 A “practitioner of yoga” meaning one dedicated to meditation practice. It can be synonymous with yogin. This is not reference to the Yogācāra school of thought that developed within the Mahāyāna. | Influential philosophical school belonging to Mahāyāna Buddhism.| Influential philosophical school belonging to Mahāyāna Buddhism. |A “practitioner of yoga” meaning one dedicated to meditation practice. It can be synonymous with yogin. This is not reference to the Yogācāra school of thought that developed within the Mahāyāna. 
རྣལ-འབྱོར-པ	 The Tibetan means “one united with the genuine state,” in other words, “one who has attained the supreme accomplishment.”| The Tibetan means “one united with the genuine state,” in other words, “one who has attained the supreme accomplishment.” | “The one who is united,” a succesful practitioner who has attained realization. The Tibetan means “one who is united with the genuine nature.” |“The one who is united,” a succesful practitioner who has attained realization. The Tibetan means “one who is united with the genuine nature.” 
རྣལ-འབྱོར-ཅན	 “One who has yoga,” meaning “one who has mastery of the practice of meditation.”|“One who has yoga,” meaning “one who has mastery of the practice of meditation.” 
རྣལ-འབྱོར-མ	 With a long history in South Asian folklore and religious traditions, yoginīs are liminal, trangressive and often ferocious semi-divine female figures associated with the bestowal of temporal and transcendent spiritual accomplishment. In Buddhist tantra they are identical to ḍākinīs.|With a long history in South Asian folklore and religious traditions, yoginīs are liminal, trangressive and often ferocious semi-divine female figures associated with the bestowal of temporal and transcendent spiritual accomplishment. In Buddhist tantra they are identical to ḍākinīs. 
རྣལ-འབྱོར-མའི-རྒྱུད	The last development of Buddhist tantra in India; focused upon the figure of the yoginī and the meditative manipulation of the subtle energetic anatomy of the physical body. Typified by the He­vajra­tantra, Cakrasaṃvaratantra and the Mahā­māyā­tantra.
རྣལའབྱོར-མའི-རྒྱུད	 The term refers variously to a literary genre, a period in the development of tantra, or, when written with lower case, an individual work belonging to this genre.|The term refers variously to a literary genre, a period in the development of tantra, or, when written with lower case, an individual work belonging to this genre. 
དཔག-ཚད	 A measure of distance corresponding to the distance traversed on horse without unyoking. It is sometimes estimated equal to about 4 or 5 miles, sometimes 9 miles.\nyojanas | A measure of distance, often translated with “league.” The exact value is disputed and varies in different sources from 1 to 40km. | The longest unit of distance in classical India. The lack of a uniform standard for the smaller units means that there is no precise equivalent, especially as its theoretical length tended to increase over time. Therefore it can mean between four and ten miles. | The longest unit of distance in classical India. The lack of a uniform standard for the smaller units means that there is no precise equivalent, especially as its theoretical length tended to increase over time. Therefore it can mean between four and ten miles.\nyojanas | The yoking distance of oxen, based on the interpretation of the Treasury of Abhidharma (Abhi­dharma­kośa), Ch. 3, vv. 87–88, one yojana may be calculated to be 7.315 metres or 4 miles 960 yds.| The yoking distance of oxen, based on the interpretation of the Treasury of Abhidharma (Abhi­dharma­kośa), Ch. 3, vv. 87–88, one yojana may be calculated to be 7.315 metres or 4 miles 960 yds. |The longest unit of distance in classical India. The lack of a uniform standard for the smaller units means that there is no precise equivalent, especially as its theoretical length tended to increase over time. Therefore it can mean between four and ten miles.
